line: Fucked.
line: Ares 2 did the same thing, in a different location on Mars. They got a firm handshake and a hot cup of coffee when they got home.
line: Once we got to Hermes, four additional unmanned missions brought us fuel and supplies while we prepared for our trip. Once
line: And now we come to the real trick of Mars exploration: Having al our shit there in advance.
line: The MAV is pretty cool. Turns out, through a neat set of chemical reactions with the Martian atmosphere, for every kilogram of
line: We had to go out in the storm to get from the Hab to the MAV. That was going to be risky, but what choice did we have?
line: The storm had abated; I was face down, almost totaly buried in sand. As I groggily came to, I wondered why I wasn’t more dead.
line: After a while, the CO2 (carbon dioxide) absorbers in the suit were expended. That’s realy the limiting factor to life support. Not the
line: The sheer volume of training for a space mission is astounding. I spent a week back on Earth practicing emergency space suit drils. I
line: me very sad: The Hab was in-tact (yay!) and the MAV was gone (boo!).
line: around.
line: larger margin of error for the return thrust. No point in giving that up for sentimentality.
line: Today I took stock of supplies, and did a quick EVA to check up on the external equipment. Here’s my situation:
line: have to use on landing). Once the chute was exposed it dragged the MDV al over the place, smashing it against every rock in the area.
line: I ran a ful diagnostic on the Oxygenator. Twice. It’s perfect. If anything goes wrong with it, there is a short-term spare I can use. But it’s solely for emergency use while repairing the main one. The spare doesn’t actualy pul CO2 apart and recaptuline: The medical area has morphine for emergencies. And there’s enough there for a lethal dose. I’m not going to slowly starve to death, I’l
line: So that’s my mission now. Find a way to communicate with Earth. If I can’t manage that, find a way to communicate with Hermes
line: good that damned thing wil do me.
line: minimum of several hours per week dedicated to sweeping off the solar array. Anyway. No needless EVAs.
line: So I have two problems: not enough dirt, and nothing edible to plant in it.
line: When they made compost heaps and tried to conserve every little ounce of living matter, I laughed at them. “Look at the sily hippies!” I would scoff. “Look at their pathetic attempts to simulate a complex global ecosystem in their back yard.”
line: Within a week, the Martian soil wil be ready for plants to germinate in. But I won’t plant yet. I’l spread it out over a doubled area. It’l
line: d it’l be backbreaking work to colect it. But in the end, if everything goes to plan, I’l have 92 square meters of croppable soil.
line: supplies and found some Vicodin. I took it about 10 minutes ago. Should be kicking in soon.
line: The Hab has an excelent Water Reclaimer. Best technology available on Earth. So NASA figured “why send a lot of water up there?
line: liters of precious water to the dirt gods.
line: Wow. Things realy came along.
line: Not even close.
line: Remember those old math questions you had in Algebra class? Where water is entering a container at a certain rate and leaving at a
line: With my 62 square meters of farmland, I’l be able to create about 288 calories per day. I need to bring that up to 1000. I need four
line: I have two Martian rovers. They have pressure seals, alowing the occupants to drive in ease, without spacesuits, as they spent long
line: farmers, it’s not worth doing because they’re working with literaly milions of potato plants.
line: farmland at 10cm deep, I’l need 6.4 more cubic meters of soil (more shoveling, whee!) and that’l need over 250 liters of water.
line: *another* EVA. I was in a pissy mood the whole time. Sweeping off a huge field of solar cels is boring and physicaly demanding. But
line: I cut each potato in to 4 pieces, making sure each piece had at least 2 eyes. The eyes are where they sprout from. I let them sit for a
line: A ful meal for dinner. I’d earned it. Plus, I’d burned a ton of calories and I wanted them back.
line: The problem with the rovers’ pop-tents is they weren’t designed for frequent use.
line: Unless you’re stranded on Mars and everyone thinks you’re dead and you’re in a desperate fight against time and the elements to stay
line: I closed the airlock from the rover side and ended up with a nice, isolated pop-tent. Setting up the equalizer hose was trivial (for once I’m using equipment the way it was designed to be used). Then, after a few trips through the airlock (with the air-line: For tonight, I have to get back to “Three’s Company.” I stopped last night in the middle of the episode where Mr. Roper saw
line: entire supply (plus the air in the Hab of course). They each contain 25 liters of liquid O2. The Hab would only use them in an emergency; it has the Oxygenator to balance the atmosphere. The reason the O2 tanks are here is to feed the spacesuits and roverline: atmosphere that enters when I use an airlock is laughable.
line: t want to give that up.
line: exceeded al plausible expectations of landings, putting us just nine meters from the target. The guy just plain owned that landing.
line: At its root, Hydrazine is pretty simple. The Germans used it as far back as World War II for rocket-assisted fighter fuel (and
line: I suppose I’l think of something. Or die.
line: They’d fil up, so I’d have to transfer O2 over to the rovers’ tanks and even space suit tanks as necessary.
line: detaching the tank from the MAV landing struts, bringing it in to the Hab, then opening the valve until it’s empty.
line: result would be, they’d answer “death by fire.”
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 33
line: need a proper fuel reaction. In fact, I realy, super-duper don’t want a proper fuel reaction.
line: If you find the charred remains of the Hab, it means I did something wrong. I’m copying this log over to both rovers so it’s more likely it’l survive.
line: It un-dramaticaly sizzled and disappeared.
line: cover the whole table where my Hydrazine mad scientist set-up was. I put a few knickknacks on the table to keep the plastic out of the
line: NASA put a lot of effort in to making sure nothing here can burn. Everything is made of metal or flame retardant plastic and the
line: There were plenty of wires and batteries around to make a spark. But you can’t just ignite wood with a smal electric spark. So I
line: water at the end!
line: The low oxygen alarm should stop soon. The high humidity alarm wil take a little longer. The Water Reclaimer has its work cut out for it today.
line: I’m writing this log to you, dear future Mars archeologist, from Rover 2. You may wonder why I’m not in the Hab right now. Because I
line: the Hab with was extremely dry and greedily sucked up a lot of the humidity. That’s where I want the water to go anyway, so I’m not
line: whenever it wants. Turns out it’s been topping off the atmosphere from Tank 1. But when I add O2 to the system (via the Oxygenator), the Hab evenly distributes the gain among the two tanks. Tank 2 has been slowly gaining oxygen.
line: Once I figured this out, and composed myself, I got a Ziploc-sized sample bag and waved it around a bit, then sealed it.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 38
line: Hydrogen is dangerous because it can blow up. But it can only blow up if there’s oxygen around. Hydrogen without oxygen is
line: The dirt is only viable soil because of the bacteria growing in it. If I get rid of al the oxygen, the bacteria wil die. I don’t have 100
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 39
line: They don’t mind the lack of oxygen but the cold wil kil them. So I’l have to pot them (bag them, actualy) and move them to a rover.
line: Things weren’t 100% successful.
line: Buy the time I got back, it was already chily. Down to 5C already. Shivering and seeing my breath condense in front of me, I threw on
line: main unit. That way it gets a good average of the Hab, and prevents one localized imbalance from throwing it off.
line: Let’s see… Martinez’s spacesuit was in the rover. Johanssen’s was outwitting the regulator. Lewis’s was serving as a water-tank. I
line: And holy hel it worked! Blowing the O2 over the sparker, I flicked the switch on the flashlight and a wonderful jet of flame fired out of the tube. The fire alarm went off, of course. But I’d heard it so much lately I barely noticed it any more.
line: nearly pure nitrogen.
line: Stumbling over to the regulator, I turned it back on.
line: Also, glancing at the Hab’s main computer, I see the temperature rose to 15C. Something very hot and very explodey happened, and I
line: I spent the day running ful diagnostics on every system in the Hab. It was incredibly boring, but my survival depends on these
line: Got to hand it to NASA. They don’t fuck around when making this stuff.
line: power to it.
line: I think I have my answer. And it comes down to me brain-farting. Remember when I decided not to wear a spacesuit? That decision
line: It just didn’t occur to me. But it should have. If your lungs grabbed up al the oxygen, mouth-to-mouth resuscitation wouldn’t work. I’m
line: “The Dukes of Hazzard,” eh? Let’s give it a whirl.
line: I’l have a lot of dead time. 10 hours for each tank of C02 to finish filing. It only takes 20 minutes to reduce the hydrazine and burn the hydrogen. I’l spend the rest of the time watching TV.
line: departed comrade from deep space. They had another ten months of travel yet to endure.
line: “Yeah, I know. I didn’t want to, either. But I’m the director of NASA. It’s kind of expected. You sure you’re ok?”
line: “I don’t know, Venk…”
line: “How wil we know from imagery what’s broken?”
line: “It’s not about satelite time, Venk,” Teddy interrupted.
line: “Venk, come on-“
line: Venkat took a deep breath and thought for a moment.
line: Kapoor.
line: “Um…” she mumbled to herself. “Uhhh…”
line: “Yeah,” she quavered. “Sorry to drag you in.”
line: canvas. Maybe the Hab didn’t do wel after al? I guess pieces got torn off and-“
line: “I read through it. Several times. They never threw out the pop tents.” Her voice cracked at the last word.
line: “Did I mention I never found Watney’s body?” She said, sniffling.
line: “One thing at a time,” Teddy said. “Venk, what makes you sure he’s alive?”
line: “That’s one of the images from last night. As you can see, Rover 2 is facing away from the Hab. The charging port is in the nose, and the cable isn’t long enough to reach.”
line: “Because,” he said. “If Watney realy is alive, we don’t want the Ares 3 crew to know.”
line: “What’s your take,” he asked.
line: to him. That’s your only job right now.”
line: “They’l be happy to hear their son’s alive,” Annie said.
line: “Thing is,” Chuck continued, “without the dish, a signal would have to be realy strong-“
line: “Sorry.”
line: “Four,” Chuck said.
line: “So four independent communication systems became one. And that one broke,” Morris finished.
line: The reporters mingled a bit, argued over seats for a short time, then finaly settled down.
line: Teddy puled some flash cards from his pocket, then cleared his throat.
line: soon. If we can see him outside, we wil be able to draw conclusions on his physical health based on stance and activities.
line: “I’ve got an idea. Wel, JPL has an idea. I’m the messenger.”
line: “So tel me about the MDV.”
line: “They’re astronauts,” Teddy said.
line: “He’s stuck out there. He thinks he’s totaly alone and that we al gave up on him. What kind of effect does that have on a man’s
line: It’s time to start thinking long term.
line: expected, Martinez landed it beautifuly. It was one of the last things we did before piling in to our MDV and heading to the surface. Ahh, the good old days, when I had a crew with me.
line: I’l need to trick out a rover. Basicaly it’l have to be a mobile Hab. I’l pick Rover 2 as my target. We have a certain bond, after I
line: 9800Wh per day. Over half my power supply, every day!
line: the rest of the day. I can drive in twilight, and save the sunny part of the day for charging. This time of year I get about 13 hours of light.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 64
line: The same kind of resin, in fact, that saved my life on Sol 6 (the patch kit I used on the hole in my suit).
line: I dragged the battery to the side of the rover and looped one end of the harness around it. Then I threw the other end over the roof. On the other side, I filed it with rocks. When the two weights were roughly equal, I was able to pul the rocks down and bline: Why not? It’s a 10 minute EVA, once per day. I’d have to swap batteries again when charging, but again: so what?
line: came here in boxes. We had to set it up on Sols 1 and 2.
line: I stood back and admired my work. Hey, I earned it. It wasn’t even noon and I was done.
line: I remember liking Hercule Poirot TV specials back when I was a kid. I’l start with The Mysterious Affair at Styles. Looks like that’s the first one.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 67
line: I was fine for a while. My own body heat plus three layers of clothing kept me warm and the rover’s insulation is top-notch. The heat
line: Wel shit.
line: But they never used large RTGs on manned missions until The Ares Program.
line: the MAV comes equipped with an RTG. It has 2.6kg of Plutonium-238, which makes almost 1500 Watts of heat. It can turn that in to 100
line: So my plan is: Head south 4km, then search around til I see the green flag.
line: It’s a large cylinder with heat-sinks al around it. I could feel the warmth it gave off even through my suit’s gloves. That’s realy
line: I spent the rest of the day vandalizing the interior of the rover. The pressure compartment is made of metal. Just inside that is insulation, which is covered by hard plastic. I used a sophisticated method to remove sections of plastic (hammer), then careline: Tomorrow, Sirius 3 (Which is just Sirius 1 again, but without freezing)
line: Now I’m just waiting for the batteries to recharge. I’m bored, so I’m updating the log. I have al the Poirot books in my computer.
line: Time to make plans for Sirius 4. And I think it’l be a multi-day field trip.
line: days. Not enough.
line: While I’m away, the Hab can take care of itself, but the potatoes are an issue. I’l saturate the ground with most of the water I have.
line: tank of compressed liquid CO2, vented in to the Hab, wil be enough CO2 to do the trick. That’l take less than a day to create.
line: “Dr. Kapoor,” Cathy began, “Mark Watney is the most-watched man in the solar system, wouldn’t you say?”
line: “Yes he did. Sort of aimlessly for an hour, then back to the Hab. He was probably testing it. Next time we saw him was two days later,
line: “Communication,” Venkat said. “Once he reaches the MAV, he could contact us.”
line: “I can’t answer that for sure. But remember, we made a lunar lander from scratch in seven years.”
line: “Guys,” said Bruce Ng, Director of JPL. “I need to catch a flight back to LA in three hours. Is Teddy coming or what?”
line: “Why Mindy?” Mitch asked.
line: “What about the RTG. Does the public know about that yet?” Teddy asked.
line: “We came up with a plan a long time ago,” Bruce said. “You rejected it.”
line: “Um,” Mindy said. “Once every 41 hours, we’l have a 17 minute gap. The orbits work out that way.”
line: Teddy looked to Venkat.
line: can tel Hermes. There needs to be some hope or there’s no point in teling them.”
line: “What about an Ares 4 presupply?” Said Teddy. “Land it at Ares 3 instead.”
line: “We’l find a way,” Bruce said. “But the OT alone wil be a nightmare.”
line: was necessary fuel. Shift schedules, fund alocations, project juggling, out and out looting of other projects… he’d never puled so many
line: “Sorry to bother you,” Mindy said.
line: 4 with that set-up. We never saw him load up the Oxygenator or Water Reclaimer. He can’t possibly have enough basics to live long
line: “Maybe,” Mindy said, unconvinced.
line: “No. Not once in the history of the Postal Service.”
line: “Of course,” Irene said. “I did monthly psych evaluations on each member of the crew.”
line: together. Social compatibility is key. Mark not only fits wel in any social group, he’s a catalyst to make the group work better. It was a terrible blow to the crew when he ‘died.’”
line: plans to be there when Ares 4 lands.”
line: “Sure thing. What’s on your mind?”
line: “But he’s probably not listening,” said Venkat. “Why would he be?”
line: “But he’l be without a Hab. Yeah,” Venkat said. “One thing at a time. Let me know when you come up with a release mechanism for
line: They both peered at the screen.
line: “Sure,” Mindy said. “But it’s just a poster from the gift shop. I’ve got high quality digital maps on my computer-“
line: Mindy looked left and right. Seeing no ruler, she grabbed the technicians notebook.
line: Venkat quickly puled out his cel phone. “We lost contact with it in 1997. If he can get it online again, we can communicate. It might
line: I’ve falen in to a routine. Every morning I wake up at dawn. First thing I do is check oxygen and CO2 levels. Then I eat a breakfast
line: total fucking darkness isn’t fun. I learned that the hard way.
line: inside’s the size of a van. That may seem like plenty of room, but try being trapped in a van for 8 days. I look forward to tending my potato farm in the wide open space of the Hab.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 80
line: Our landing site is at the delta of a long-gone river. If there are any microscopic fossils to be had, it’s a good place to look. Also, the water would have dragged rock and soil samples from thousands of kilometers away. With some digging, we could getline: she is.
line: I better get started!
line: the past few sols are intact. I should be able to get back to Lewis Valey just by folowing them.
line: she was afraid of a tattoo needle.
line: Pathfinder’s final stage of descent was a baloon-covered tetrahedron. The baloons absorbed the impact of landing. Once it came to
line: After a quick search, I found Sojourner. The little fela was only two meters from the Lander. I vaguely remember it was further away
line: Just like the other three panels, the central panel had deflated baloons underneath it.
line: At least, that’s what I wanted to do. The damn thing is stil heavy as hel. I’m guessing it’s 200kg. Even in Mar's gravity that's a bit
line: Now I’m in the rover, looking at Sojourner. It seems al right. No physical damage on the outside. Doesn’t look like anything got too
line: That al assumes I can get the Lander’s radio working at al.
line: The roof of the rover is over 2 meters from the ground. So I’d need a ramp almost 4 meters long. I got to work.
line: take the ramp apart to keep that from happening.
line: As I’d hoped, my inbound tracks gave me a path back to Lewis Valey. Then it was four sols of easy driving. The hils to my left made
line: At first, I figured it was my duty. If I survive, geologists wil love me for it. But then it started to get fun. Now, as I drive, I look forward to that simple act of bagging rocks.
line: interplanetary travel, I can tel you there are no scientific inaccuracies in the story. It’s quite common for probes to land on the wrong planet. Also, the probe’s large, flat-panel hul is ideal for the high-pressure Venusian atmosphere. And, as we alline: Though he’d probably give me a bunch of shit about it. “Why didn’t you do stretching exercises? Your body is important! Eat more
line: worked. We put it behind us and got back to normal.
line: After a few celebratory laps around the Hab, it was time to get to work.
line: belonged, wiring them into the Hab’s power grid.
line: It pained me to climb back into the rover, but it had to be done. If the RTG ever broke open, it would kil me to death.
line: idea what became of Sojourner. It might be in better shape. Maybe it just needs power. Power it couldn’t get with the solar panels
line: temperature. So they have heaters to keep the electronics warm. It’s a problem that rarely comes up on Earth, but hey. Mars.
line: Working in an EVA suit is annoying enough. Bending over the whole time would have been torture.
line: Then there’s the issue of heat. It’s a good idea to keep electronics above -40C. The temperature today is a brisk -63C.
line: that matter? Wel, I’l tel ya…
line: Martian air severely hampers its ability to work. So the electronics might need more time to warm up.
line: LOADING OS...
line: METEOROLOGY: NONFUNCTIONAL
line: LISTENING FOR TELEMETRY SIGNAL...
line: components, network everything, and instal hastily made software to interact with the modern Deep Space Network. A team of engineers
line: Turning to the headsetted man at the communications console, Venkat asked “What’s you’re name, new best friend?”
line: removed.”
line: Al right. Enough happy dance. Time to make with the communicatin’!
line: “Best guess?”
line: Pointing to the next reporter, he said, “Go ahead.”
line: “You’re a smart-ass, Tim,” Venkat said.
line: The vertical stripes revealed a handwritten note, suspended at the camera’s height by a thin metal rod.
line: “There’s the third note,” said Tim.
line: and if it comes down to it, I can re-use them by scratching out the old question.
line: including numbers, punctuation, etc.
line: S…T…A…T…U…S
line: W…E…S…A…W…-…S…A…T…L…I…T…E
line: Earth is about to set. Resume 08:00 my time tomorrow morning. Tell family I’m fine. Give crew my best. Tell Commander
line: “Focus, Jack,” interrupted Venkat.
line: change to the rover’s software.”
line: “Here’s the clever part,” Jack said, conspiratorialy. “The rover currently parses the signal into bytes, then identifies the specific
line: “So we just need to send Watney those 20 instructions?” Venkat asked.
line: “Cut the shit, Venkat. I need a picture.”
line: “You have the pictures of his notes. Make do with that.”
line: I have to be watching the camera when it spels shit out. It’s half a byte at a time. So I watch a pair of numbers, then look them up on
line: time! I set up a note that said “Roger.”
line: left of the screen is 2AAE5, then replace the bytes there with a 141 byte sequence NASA wil send in the next message. Fair enough.
line: “Ayyyyyy!” Annie mocked. “Why would he do that?”
line: “We were thinking,” Jack began, “This rover hack might get kind of detailed. We may have to do a bunch of back-and-forth
line: “Can’t do it, Jack. The crew stil doesn’t know.”
line: Each crewman had their own laptop. So I have six at my disposal. Rather, I “had” six. I now have five. I thought a laptop would be fine
line: “Jack,” said Tim.
line: “He’s not funny to computer guys either.”
line: working on rescue plans. JPL is adjusting Ares 4’s MDV to do a short overland
line: concentrate on their own mission.
line: world.
line: “Yeah, about that,” said Mitch. “You probably know why I’m here.”
line: “I knew you’d be here sooner or later, so I already thought it through and decided. Go ahead and tel them.”
line: “Come on,” Lewis prodded, “no bitching. You got 40 minutes more sleep than you would’ve on Earth.”
line: “Yeah, ok,” Beck said blearily.
line: “You can tel the difference?” Watney said, passing Martinez a pack.
line: “Hey Sunshine,” Watney caled to Johanssen. “Eating breakfast today?”
line: “Houston authorized it,” Lewis said.
line: you’re in charge of what we dig up.”
line: “That’s fine,” Lewis confirmed. “I’ve got four so far.”
line: “Sustained winds over 100kph now,” she said. “Gusting to 125.”
line: their feet.
line: “Watney!” Johanssen exclaimed.
line: “Shit!” Lewis exclaimed. “Johanssen where did you last see him?”
line: ladder to the crew compartment, he slid in to the pilot’s couch and booted the system.
line: “Copy,” Lewis said.
line: “Commander,” Martinez said. “Tilting at 10.5 degrees now, with gusts pushing it to 11.”
line: “You realy think I’l leave you behind?” Martinez said.
line: equalized, Lewis’s voice came over the radio.
line: “No way,” Martinez said. “It’s made to see Hermes in orbit, not the metal in a single space suit.”
line: “Nothing?” Lewis asked.
line: “I’ve got one trick. If that doesn’t work, I’m folowing her orders.”
line: “Standby,” Martinez replied.
line: “There is danger of damage to the vents,” Vogel cautioned. “The OMS was not made for prolonged thrusts,”
line: The four crewmates awaited their commander’s response.
line: “Yes, Ma’am,” he replied, activating the sequence.
line: Suddenly, al force stopped. The first stage had completed. The crew experienced weightlessness for several seconds, then were
line: NASA was loathe to waste research time. Trips to and from Mars were as busy as surface operations. The crew had almost caught up
line: Because the ship was already designed for it, they used the system on the return trip as wel.
line: system update for me. Huh… there’s a voice message addressed to the whole crew.”
line: “Wha-“ Beck stammered.
line: them. Henderson out.”
line: “You folowed orders,” Lewis interrupted. “I left him behind. In a barren, unreachable, godforsaken wasteland.”
line: Now that NASA can talk to me, they won’t shut the hel up.
line: In your face, Neil Armstrong!
line: one-way communication. Why Morse Code? Because making dots and dashes with rocks is a lot easier than making letters.
line: At first, they were working on a desperate plan to get a probe here before Sol 400. But I bought another 500 sols of life with my
line: smart-ass. And it's a lot roomier on Hermes without you. We have to take turns
line: The employees carefully folded the sheet, and placed it in an argon-filled airtight shipping container. Printing out a sticker,
line: Ayup.
line: screaming.
line: denied. Enjoy your boogie fever.
line: publicly refute it.
line: its hull. It fell unceremoniously to the surface, bouncing and rolling, until it finally came to rest.
line: ’s a closed system. Plus, I made like 600 liters from MDV fuel (remember the “explosive Hab” incident?). I could take baths and stil have plenty left over.
line: the patches ensured air-tight mating.
line: So I took it apart.
line: And just as I’d suspected, there was a clogged tube. The Water Reclaimer was designed to purify urine and strain humidity out of the
line: the airlock seal-strip. Other sections of canvas undulated along their seal-strips together, acting as a single sheet, but AL102 had no such luxury. The airlock barely moved, leaving AL102 to take the full force of the tempest.
line: astronaut traveling in and out of the Hab almost daily. Airlock 1 was closest to the rover charging station, so the astronaut
line: I’m worried about Pathfinder. If the sandstorm damaged it, I’l have lost my connection to NASA. Logicaly, I shouldn’t worry. The
line: tian Potato Migration.
line: The initial tear was less than 1 milimeter. The perpendicular carbon fibers should have prevented the rip from growing. But countless
line: The airlock tumbled across the surface for a further 15 meters. The heavy padding of Watney’s suit saved him from many broken
line: He listened intently to the hiss. Then he touched his broken faceplate. Then he looked out the window again.
line: I’m in the airlock. I can see the Hab out the window; it’s a good 50 meters away. Normaly, the airlock is attached to the Hab. So that’s a problem.
line: Things aren’t as bad as they seem.
line: It’s a smal leak. With the faceplate gone, the EVA suit is effectively managing the whole airlock. It’s been adding air to make up for the missing pressure. But it’l run out eventualy.
line: looking through it, it’s al metal or non-flammable plastic.
line: Plastic might not burn, but anyone whose played with a baloon knows it’s great at building up static charge. Once I do that, I should be able to make a spark just by touching a metal tool.
line: My third try, the quick arm movements I used to set the fire messed everything up. Just moving around makes enough turbulence to
line: Given time, I might be able to come up with a plan for the faceplate. Then, I could take a few seconds during that plan to scrape resin
line: Let’s see if it holds…
line: The patch kit is too smal, but stil useful. I can spread the resin around the edge of where the faceplate was, then stick something on to cover the hole. Problem is, what do I use to cover the hole? Something that can stand up to a lot of pressure.
line: And what about the gaping hole on the stumpy arm? Unlike my faceplate, the suit’s material is flexible. I’l press it together and seal it with resin. I’l have to press my left arm against my side while I’m in the suit, but there’l be room.
line: ole.
line: Then I watched the readouts to see how airtight things were.
line: The three tanks combined had 3000ml to start with. A lot of that was used to maintain pressure while the airlock was leaking. Also, my
line: What good is going to the rover? I’d just be trapped there instead. The extra room would be nice, but I’d stil die eventualy. No Water
line: I left Martinez’s near my bunk, in case I needed a suit in a hurry. Of course, after that sudden decompression, it could be anywhere.
line: I figured if I want it to rol, I’l need to hit the wal as hard as possible. And I have to be in the air at the time. I can’t press against some other part of the airlock. The forces would cancel and it wouldn’t move at al.
line: RECORDING:
line: around under the colapsed canvas. Find Martinez’s suit (or Vogel’s if I run in to it first). Get to the rover. Then I’m safe.
line: turning your whole EVA-suited body to look at something was a strenuous waste of time. So they mounted a smal camera on the right
line: started. Lighter objects are wildly jumbled, many of them out on the surface. Everything’s covered in soil and mangled potato plants.
line: So I’m back in the rover. Just like I was back on the Great Pathfinder Recovery Expedition. Ugh. At least this time it smels a little
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 121
line: But refiling is slow, slower than my suit was leaking. So it wasn’t any use to me. Now, with a solid suit capable of holding pressure,
line: The Hab is normaly a dome, with flexible support poles maintaining the arch, and rigid, folding floor material to keep it flat. The internal pressure was a vital part of its support. Without it, the whole thing colapsed. I inspected the poles, and none ofline: ed as wel. Even if they hadn’t, the freezing cold would have kiled them.
line: By Sol 856 I’l be long dead.
line: Minor cut on my forehead. Had some issues with my EVA suit (I’ll explain later). I
line: completely offline. Best guess is water froze up inside and burst some tubing. I’m
line: count 1841. That will last me 184 days. Including the remaining mission rations,
line: “It's a whole new balgame,” Bruce continued. “Our focus is food. Anything else is a luxury. We don't have time to make a powered-
line: “We do have some things going for us,” he finaly said. “We have some of the parts built for the Ares 4 presupply missions. We can
line: I've got all Hab systems up and running again. The Water Reclaimer is working fine
line: [08:47]WATNEY: Gay probe coming to save me. Got it.
line: He began an email to his boss.
line: Furrowing his brow, he stared in to the distance.
line: “Mitch,” Teddy said to the flight controler, “What about the launch?”
line: “Good, good,” Teddy nodded. “Now for the big question: Bruce? How's Iris coming along?”
line: “Give me a number,” Teddy said.
line: and thin to begin with.”
line: “How often do those inspections reveal a problem?” Teddy asked.
line: “ 'Normaly' was a long time ago,” Teddy said calmly. “97.5% is better than zero. Can anyone think of a safer way to get more time?”
line: Turning to Keler, he said “Make the food last another 4 days.”
line: “Wel... that's fine, I guess,” Mike said, “but you need to do your assigned work first. I asked for those satelite adjustments two weeks ago and you stil haven't done them.”
line: “Oh, I'm not going home,” said Rich, returning to his calculations.
line: [08:31]WATNEY: Great! I'm sick of sitting on my ass. I'm going to be here for
line: The other two shifts watched from the observation deck. They had rarely seen their own homes in two months; a makeshift bunkroom
line: “That's true,”Annie smiled. “We alocated 100 grams for luxury items. There are some handwritten letters from Mark's family, a note
line: “It's not about the bottom line,” Annie said, prepared for the question. “It's about a human life in immediate danger. But if you want to look at it financialy, consider the value of Mark Watney's extended mission. His prolonged mission and fight foline: “Roger that, Houston,” came the reply from the Launch Control Director in Florida. “CLCDR checking al stations are manned and
line: “QAM2.”
line: “Go.”
line: holding its breath.
line: “Guidance.”
line: “Houston, this is Launch Control, we are go for launch.”
line: meeting room where a TV had been set up. In the back of his mind, he thought the office was unusualy quiet, but he gave it no further
line: “Trim's good, Flight.” came the immediate response.
line: Mitch looked over to the Ascent Flight Director. “Say again?”
line: been given more time, they would have.
line: “How violent?” Mitch said.
line: solidified. But it was given only a quarter-second.
line: The off-center load presented unequal force to the four remaining bolts, the defective one bearing the brunt of it. Soon, it failed as wel.
line: “How bad?”
line: Mitch zeroed in on that last comment. “Entirely lost the probe?” Mitch asked.
line: After a moment, Mitch said “Reestablish?”
line: Mitch put his head in his hands. “Roger,” he said.
line: Chapter 16
line: would be gay.
line: Yet, the State Council insisted al launches be shrouded in secrecy. Even launches with nothing to hide. This way, other nations could
line: “It was cold, yet manageable,” Zhu Tao said.
line: “Possibly,” Zhu Tao said. “Possibly not.”
line: why the booster had to be so powerful. But a lighter payload could be sent al the way to Mars.”
line: “Time would be the enemy, Sir,” Zhu Tao answered. “Based on travel duration and the supplies their astronaut has remaining, any such
line: along. If they had a bulk payout for it's value, they'd just keep it. We'd never get to build another one.”
line: “And that is?”
line: Johanssen:
line: be off the mission. I guess after a lifetime of commanding sailors she's got an
line: “Folks,” he said, “This is going to be the most 'ghetto' spacecraft ever built. There's only one way to finish that fast: No landing system.”
line: “Team One wil make the outer shel, guidance system, and thrusters. Al we need is for it to get to Mars. I want the safest possible
line: “I came up with something a while ago. Spent a lot of time on it.” He dumped the papers on Venkat's desk. “Lemme find the
line: “The Taiyang Shen?” Rich snorted. “That won't work. You can't make a Mars probe in a month.”
line: “Who would I tel?”
line: Vogel:
line: tubes and soil and pH levels and Zzzzzzzzzz....
line: “Why does 'Elrond' mean 'secret meeting'?” Annie asked.
line: Venkat took a deep breath. “One of our astrodynamicists, Rich Purnel, has found a way to get Hermes back to Mars. The course he
line: Teddy leaned forward. “Run us through it, Venkat. What would it entail?”
line: “Schiapareli Crater!?” Mitch gaped. “That's 3,200km away!”
line: “It'd have to lose weight... a lot of weight. I can get rooms ful of people working on these problems if we decide to do this.”
line: “They wouldn't hesitate,” Mitch said. “Not for a second. That's why Venkat caled this meeting.” He cast a disapproving glare at
line: “We already have a rescue option,” Teddy said. “We're just discussing another one.”
line: and ion engines continued to work, we could bring it back.”
line: “So,” Bruce offered, “We can have a high chance of kiling one person, or a low chance of kiling 6 people. Jeez. How do we even
line: “The window for starting the maneuver ends in 39 hours.”
line: I won't lie: It could end badly. I have no idea what she thinks of you. Or of
line: “It wasn't an easy decision,” Teddy said to the assembled elite. “But I've decided to go with Iris 2. No Rich Purnel Maneuver.”
line: “Of course I do,” Teddy replied. “And I'm sick of your infantile attitude. You can throw al the tantrums you want, but the rest of us
line: Bruce slumped in his chair. “Sheesh,” he said, nervously. “We're scientists, for Christ's sake. What the hel!?”
line: I know you pretty well. So I’m guessing you blame yourself for my situation.
line: But there's something more important we need to discuss: What is it with you and
line: Barring a complete computer failure or other critical event, Vogel’s vast knowledge of astrodynamics would never come in to play.
line: He walked down the narrow halway. The crew quarters stood against the outer hul of the constantly-spinning ship to maximize
line: “Where's the file?” she asked, typing on her keyboard.
line: He froze. “Sol 549!?” he exclaimed. “Mein Gott!”
line: “How would he get off Mars?” Martinez asked.
line: “Are we going to do it?” Johanssen asked.
line: “Easy, cowboy,” Lewis said. “You and I are military. There's a good chance we'd be court-martialed when we got home. As for the
line: “Remote Override,” Johanssen said. “It's designed to get the ship back if we al die or something. They can take over Hermes from
line: It's part of the OS, I'l have to jump over the code... yes. I can do it.”
line: They were going back to Mars.
line: “Unscheduled status update from Hermes.”
line: “Go Telemetry,” Brendan said.
line: “CAPCOM, Read your logs and see what the previous shift did. See if a massive course change was ordered and somehow nobody
line: “Why'd you do it, Mitch?” Teddy demanded.
line: “You're damn right we have a lot on our plates!” Teddy fumed. “After your little stunt, we're committed to this thing.”
line: Chapter 17
line: Schiapareli Crater here I come!
line: Nope. It's got dick-al.
line: means of communication with NASA, Pathfinder gets to ride on the roof, Granny Clampett style.
line: in a line, then chisel out the remaining chunks between them.
line: drilling, and that's just too long. All our other ideas hinge on this cut working.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 193
line: Anyway, the dril fit in the airlock easily. It's only a meter tal, and shaped like a jackhammer. We did our rock sampling standing up,
line: want me to cut.
line: Pathfinder's camera can see it. We'll let you know if you got it right.
line: when making stuff to send to Mars.
line: [12:25] JPL: Seriously, Mark? Seriously?
line: It wasn't designed to operate constantly for so long. Fortunately, it sensed the overheat and warned me. So I leaned it against the
line: Awww yeah. That's right. I'm either getting rescued on Sol 549 or I'm dying. That means I have 35 days of extra food. I can indulge
line: chunks to chisel out. And I'm not sure how wel carbon composite is going to take to that. But NASA'l do it a thousand times back on
line: There are plenty of great candidates: Life on Mars by David Bowie, Rocket Man by Elton John, Alone Again (Naturally) by Gilbert O'Sulivan.
line: labor is making me sleep wonderfuly.
line: I fucked up big time. I made a mistake that might kil me.
line: your wife and seeing two wine glasses in the sink. Any time you hear “We interrupt this program...”
line: I finished my day at 17:00 after driling 131 holes. Not as good as yesterday, but I lost some time to the dril malfunction.
line: acknowledge.
line: The same time the dril died.
line: I was elated! What a relief! With a smile on my face, I fetched my electronics kit and prepared to reattach the lead. I puled it out of the probe to give it a good cleaning (as best I can with the gloves of my space suit) and noticed something strange. Thline: weather conditions (no water and frequent sandblasting can make impressive static charge).
line: Pathfinder operates on 50 miliamps. It got nine thousand miliamps, which plowed through the delicate electronics, frying everything along the way. The breakers tripped, but it was too late.
line: Mars and my stupidity keep trying to kil me.
line: them for my trip to Pathfinder. I used CO2 filters to regulate the atmosphere, and brought enough oxygen and water for the whole trip. That won't work this time. I need the Big Three.
line: water per sol, so my supply wil last 206 sols. There's only 100 sols after I leave and before I'm picked up (or die in the attempt).
line: The spec said 44.1pn, but al this time it's only been using 7.35 because of the reduced load. Now we're getting somewhere!
line: The Hab's atmosphere is 90 times as dense, so it turns to liquid at much higher temperatures. The regulator gets the best of both
line: I need the regulator. But I don't need the Oxygenator al the time. I just need to get CO2 out of the air, and back-fil with oxygen. I
line: The RTG!
line: As with most of life's problems, this one can be solved by a box of pure radiation.
line: 200kg. I'l probably have more solar cels than before, and maybe a battery from the Hab. Plus the Atmospheric Regulator and
line: out that my 18pn budget can power the Oxygenator enough to make 2.5 sols of O2. I'd have to stop every two to three sols to reclaim
line: Either it'l kil me or it won't. A lot of work went in to making sure it doesn't break. If I can't trust NASA, who can I trust? (For now I'l forget that NASA told us to bury it far away.)
line: taking a few days off from heavy labor. To that end, I made a little invention just for me...
line: Why the hell didn't I think of this before?
line: single sol. I want to minimize how often I have days with no travel. The more juice I can give the Oxygenator, the more oxygen it'l liberate, and the longer I can go between those “air-sols.”
line: I headed out for an EVA. This time, being very careful while lugging rocks around, I speled out a Morse code message: “INJURED
line: The only way to get al 28 on the roof was to make stacks so high they'd fal off the first time I turned. If I lashed them together, they'd fal off as a unit. If I found a way to attach them perfectly to the rover, the rover would tip. I didn't even botherline: I won't need them this time around. I can return the second battery to the trailer whence it came. In fact, it'l save me the hassle of the mid-drive EVA I had to do every day to swap cables. When the rovers are linked up, they share resources including elline: I'l make those brackets and instal them tomorrow. I would have done it today, but it got dark and I got lazy.
line: Each strut is 2 meters long, and held together by bolts. I brought them in to the Hab to save myself the hassle of working in an EVA
line: After lashing the cels in place, I took a little drive. I did some basic acceleration and deceleration, turned in increasingly tight circles, and even did a power-stop. The cels didn't budge.
line: enator. Between the Hab components it'l be carrying and the rover, there'l be two redundant life support systems. That's plenty.
line: nt half of the trailer. If I hadn't cleared the useless shit out earlier today, I'd never have gotten them both in.
line: I've been in mortal danger for months; I'm kind of used to it now. But now I'm nervous again. Dying would suck, but my crewmates
line: Lewis sighed, “Me too, babe.”
line: “Oh? What'd you get?”
line: “At least we don't have to go to Jiuquan til tomorrow,” Venkat moaned. “14½ hours of flying is enough for one day.”
line: “Excuse me, gentlemen,” came a voice from beside them.
line: “I'l pass that along,” Su Bin smiled.
line: “Well played. And how is my mother? ”
line: “Welcome to Jiuquan,” Guo Ming said. “I hope your flight was smooth? ”
line: “He's a pain in the ass,” Teddy said.
line: “Why does it have to be you?”
line: “Engineer? Like Scotty?”
line: “I'm sure there wasn't an eyebal.”
line: “Yes, I'm pretty awesome,” he agreed.
line: “I know,” Martinez said.
line: “Happy to do it,” Venkat said.
line: guidance system. So it'l be remote-controled by a human pilot.”
line: “Like bringing in the groceries?” Cathy asked.
line: “Try not to think about that,” Johanssen said.
line: “How did I end up in this situation?” He lamented. “I'm the district sales manager of a napkin factory. Why is my daughter in space?”
line: “What good wil that do?” He said. “She's going to be tied up in knots until you're back home.”
line: never tried to control you. I've been realy good about that, right?”
line: “Everyone would die but me,” she said. “They'd al take pils and die. They'l do it right away so they don't use up any food.
line: Taiyang Shen's con-trail wafted in the chily Gobi sky. The ship, no longer visible to the naked eye, pressed onward toward orbit. Its deafening roar dwindled to a distant rumbling thunder.
line: “In the end, we built a beautiful probe. The largest, sturdiest unmanned probe in history. And now it's sitting in a warehouse. It'l never fly. The State Council won't fund another booster like that.”
line: Lewis floated behind Johanssen and Martinez's stations.
line: “Distance 43m, velocity 2.3m/s.” Johanssen caled out.
line: “Range?” Martinez asked.
line: “Beck,” Lewis said. “Your services won't be needed.”
line: Taking off her headset, she turned to Martinez and Johanssen. “Unload the probe and stow the supplies. I'm going to help Beck and
line: “Come on! I thought you liked Mexican!”
line: Remember the pop-tents? I cut the bottom out of one and the remaining canvas was the right size and shape. I used seal-strips to
line: The AREC is fairly smal. I made a shelf for it just under the solar panel shelves. The tubing and shelf are ready for when I eventualy
line: I started with a Large Rigid Sample Container (or “plastic box” to people who don't work at NASA). I ran a tube through the open
line: quickly heated it. It was gaining a degree per minute. I let it go until it was a good 40C. Then I hooked up the regulator's return air line to my contraption and watched the results.
line: There's an international treaty saying no country can lay claim to anything that's not on Earth. And by another treaty, if you're not in any country's territory, maritime law applies.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 383
line: There's going to be a lot of dangerous driving.
line: The worst part of the Pathfinder trip was being trapped in the rover. I had to live in a cramped environment that was ful of junk and
line: I could attach the pop tent to either vehicle's airlock. I'm going with the rover instead of the trailer. The rover has the computer and controls. If I need to know status of anything (like life support or how wel the battery is charging) I'l need access.line: It's gonna take a lot of glue to make this happen.
line: of Hab canvas: The Hab.
line: I've been eating potatoes for weeks. Theoreticaly, with my 3/4 ration plan, I should stil be eating food packs. But 3/4 ration is hard to maintain, so now I'm eating potatoes.
line: I started the day with a potato. I washed it down with some Martian Coffee. That's my name for “hot water with a caffeine pil
line: Then I did a controled shutdown of the Hab. The critical components are designed to survive a vacuum. Hab depress is one of the
line: angles and corners (pressure vessels don't like those). It'l baloon out to a more round shape.
line: It took hours, but I finaly got a good seal. I'l tel ya, the Hab looks pretty “ghetto” now. One whole side of it is lower than the rest. I'l have to hunch down when I'm over there.
line: Anyway, as you can tel from how not dead I am, the Hab stayed sealed overnight. The seal is solid. Ugly as hel, but solid.
line: to place.
line: It fired out and filed in three seconds. The open airlock hatchway led directly to the bedroom, and it appeared to be holding pressure.
line: Water: 620L.
line: anything important I forgot.
line: I have two pressure vessels: The rover and the trailer. They're connected by hoses, but they're also not stupid. If one loses pressure,
line: Nothing “bad” can happen to the potatoes. They're already dead. I've been storing them outside for months anyway. Also, they're smal
line: “Uh, yeah,” Mindy said, typing on her keyboard. “I noticed things would always change around 9am local time. People usualy keep
line: Venkat shrugged. “It's amazing how much red tape gets cut when everyone's rooting for one man to survive.” He pointed to the screen.
line: “What?” Mindy said. “What about course corrections and alignment?”
line: “But seeing his status doesn't help,” Mindy said. “It's not like we can do anything about it if he fals behind. This is a pointless task.”
line: (and I wouldn't even dent in the O2 level). So it's safe to move the Regulator and Oxygenator over for a while.
line: When gutting the trailer to make room, I left one tank in place for this. It's supposed to hold oxygen, but a tank's a tank. Thank God al the air lines and valves are standardized across the mission. That's no mistake. It's a deliberate decision for maintline: I left the equipment running when I returned to the Hab. It'l be on its own al night and I'l check it in the morning. It's not a true test, because I'm not there to breathe up the oxygen and make CO2, but one step at a time.
line: I decided it was a good time to test the bedroom.
line: I'l test it again tomorrow.
line: bedroom is attached to the airlock, but I can go in to the rover and close the door.
line: “What's up, Venk?” Mitch asked. “Why the sudden meeting?”
line: without an EVA suit. He probably plans to do as much as he can in that room.”
line: me.”
line: “Shit,” Mitch said, rubbing his eyes. “And we can't warn him.”
line: “We can't?” Teddy said.
line: I made one concession to common sense: I left most of my water supply in the Hab. I loaded 20 liters; enough for the test but no more.
line: “Let's get through status quickly,” Lewis said. “We're al behind in our science assignments. Vogel, you first.”
line: “It's on the microscopic scale,” Johanssen said. “We'd need a lab. Usualy they replace the veins after each mission.”
line: Martinez furrowed his brow. “It's stil trying to cook me. The climate control just isn't keeping up. I think it's the tubing in the wals that brings the coolant. I can't get at them because they're built in to the hul. We can use the room for storage ofline: “You thought I didn't?” Lewis said. “It's a smal ship.”
line: The bedroom is awesome. Large, spacious, and comfortable. On the first night, I ran in to a little problem with the temperature. It was
line: kind of tricky, but I worked out how.
line: my EVA suit. I just want to make sure nothing's obviously wrong.
line: An Air Day turns out to be pretty much the same as any other day, but without the 4 hour drive. Once I set up the solar panels, I fired
line: r's motors won't be
line: Once I shut everything down, an eerie silence was al that remained. I've spent 449 sols listening to the heaters, vents, and fans. But
line: Mawrth Valis! I'm finaly here!
line: On an Air Day, I wake up and turn on the Oxygenator. The solar panels are already out from the day before. Everything's ready to go.
line: “Welcome back to CNN's Mark Watney Report,” Cathy said to the camera. “We're speaking with our frequent guest, Dr. Venkat
line: “How long until he enters the Tau Event.”
line: “There's always hope,” Venkat said. “Maybe he'l figure it out faster than we think and turn around in time. Maybe the storm wil
line: I can't get away with that this time. My “map” (such as it is) consists of satelite images far too low-resolution to be of any use. They just never expected me to be out this far. The only reason I had high-res images of the Pathfinder region is becauline: Fortunately, I have accurate clocks. There are four computers in my immediate line of sight right now. And I have Phobos.
line: Watney always placed it close to the rover when rocks were in abundance, usualy to the north.
line: rise, but a constant one. I'm at a much higher altitude now. Adicalia Planitia (where the lonely Hab is hanging out) is 3000m below elevation zero, and Arabia Terra is 500m below. So I've gone up two and a half kilometers.
line: Anyway, if I end up at the edge of a crater I'l have to backtrack to somewhere useful. And it's a damn maze of craters out here. I'l
line: I've been gathering soil and rock samples from each place I camp. I did the same thing on my way to Pathfinder. But this time, I know
line: The next few days travel should be easy. The next major obstacle is Marth Crater. It's right in my straight-line path toward Schiapareli.
line: “He was dead before,” Martinez said. “It was rough on morale, but we soldiered on. Besides, he won't die.”
line: “Of course not,” Lewis said.
line: After Marth, I'l be out of the Watney Triangle (yeah, I'm liking that name more and more). Then I can beeline toward Schiapareli with
line: The little crater doesn't have a name. At least, not on the maps I have. So I dub it “Entrance Crater.” Because I can.
line: I'l have to wait for another Phobos transit to get my longitude, and I'l need to wait for nightfal to sight Deneb for my latitude. So I'm done driving for the day. I'd made 70km out of the 90km I usualy do. So it's not too much wasted potential driving.
line: what I wanted to see. As far as I can tel, I hit Marth Crater dead-on.
line: But I couldn't see the far side. There was a haze in the air. It's not uncommon; Mars has weather and wind and dust, after al. But it
line: That's when a bunch of stuff started to dawn on me:
line: And I have to hustle. Dust storms move. Sitting stil means I'l likely get overwhelmed. But which way do I go? It's no longer an issue of trying to be efficient. If I go the wrong way this time, I'l eat dust and die.
line: morning, as soon as it was light enough to navigate. Then he capitalized on the midday sun to maximize recharging.
line: I'm on the very edge of a storm. I don't know its size or heading. But it's moving, and that's something I can take advantage of. I don't have to wander around exploring it. It'l come to me.
line: I can do that by sitting here for a sol. I can compare tomorrow's wattage to today's. Al I have to do is make sure to compare the same
line: locations, I'l learn the shape of the storm. If the storm is thicker to the south, I'l go north to get around it. If it's thicker north, I'l go south.
line: When I packed for this road trip, I made sure to bring al my kits and tools. Just in case I had to repair the rover en-route.
line: I put a power meter in to a smal sample container, then glued a camera to the underside of the lid. When I sealed up the container, the
line: Then I had an EVA. I detached two of my solar cels and hooked them up to the power loggers. I let them log happily for an hour, then
line: I left a power-logger behind when I started out. Then, after 40km travel due south, I had a quick EVA to set up another. Now I've
line: the storm and doomed to die, I'm totaly eating the other earmarked meals.
line: recorded a 6.4% loss at its southernmost location. It paints a pretty clear picture: the storm front runs northwest to southeast. And I already worked out it's traveling west.
line: Hopefuly.
line: before then, too.
line: Wel, NASA probably knows. And the news stations back on Earth are probably showing it. And there's probably a website like
line: Mind you, it hasn't been that bad. I'm wel in to Terra Meridiani now, and the driving is a little easier here than the rugged ass-kicking terrain of Arabia Terra. Schiapareli is almost due east, and if my sextant and Phobos calculations are correct, I've line: Thing is, it's not worth it. I'm only 13 sols away from the MAV. Why go out of my way to dig up another broken-ass rover to use as a
line: Holy shit. I just realized I actualy believe I'l get to the MAV. See what I did there? I casualy talked about what I'l do after I get to the MAV. Like it was nothing. No big deal. I'm just going to pop over to Schiapareli and hang with the MAV there.
line: rovers had to be fuly functional or we couldn't use either.
line: Of course, if the Atmospheric Regulator or Oxygenator have problems, I'l need to cut in to the bedroom to get to them. But I've been
line: Tomorrow, once I get to Entrance Crater, I'l turn south and enter the Schiapareli Basin via the “Entrance Ramp.” I did some back-of-
line: For milions of years, the rim of the crater had been under constant attack from wind. It eroded the rocky crest like a river cuts through a mountain range. After aeons, it finaly breached the edge.
line: While providing a smal average slope into the crater, the ramp itself was rugged and bitterly uneven.
line: Before the traveler could react, the rover roled on to its side. As it did, the solar cels neatly stacked on the roof flew off and scattered like a dropped deck of cards.
line: The department heads stared at the satelite image on the projection screen.
line:  roled and slid from there.
line: “First thing he’l do is an EVA to assess damage,” Venkat said. “Mindy, keep us posted on any changes.”
line: The pressure vessel is intact, so that's a plus. The valves that lead to the trailer hoses are shut. Probably means the hoses disconnected.
line: chemical CO2 absorption. I have 312 hours of filters left. Plus I have another 171 hours of EVA suit CO2 filters as wel. Al told, they'l last 483 hours, which is close to 20 sols. So I have time to get things working again.
line: rover's roof, 7on the trailer's roof, and 8 on the makeshift shelves I instaled on the sides of both vehicles.)
line: “What? That's it?” Venkat said over the phone.
line: “Already sent.”
line: I get set up at the MAV, my solar cels and batteries wil be in a fixed position. I don't want to move the rover around every time I use a dril on the far side of the MAV. So I brought al the electrical cabling I could fit.
line: I backed away, puling the line more and more. Something had to give, and it wasn't going to be me. I had Archimedes on my side. The
line: the sun sets realy early from my point of view. I'm in the shadow of the western wal. And that royaly sucks.
line: Oh god the digging.
line: And now I'm out of daylight again. I can't wait to get out of this fucking shadow. Al I need is one day of driving toward the MAV and
line: The Atmospheric Regulator was stil in perfect working order, but it had nothing to do. Without being connected to the rover, it no
line: rning air to bubble through.
line: accident. The problem was that one wheel was on solid ground while the other was on soft powder.
line: Up til now I've been driving 25kph, so I'm going to cut that to 5kph. I'm stil toward the top of the Ramp, but the whole thing is only
line: “Awesome.” Mitch said.
line: “Can I spread the word?” Annie asked. “It'd be nice to see something other than the rover crash site on the news tonight.”
line: “So wil I.”
line: But the slow speed ensured that I wouldn't fal in to anymore powder pits along the way. And of course I didn't encounter any. I could
line: I didn't get as much recharge I usualy would yesterday. Because of my extended driving time, I only recharged to 70% before night
line: here's what I'm realy stoked about: I caught a blip from the MAV!
line: IDEA!!!” But it's a realy sandy area.
line: leaping celebrations.
line: t door.
line: working fine. I didn't bring the Water Reclaimer. Just brought the water. Plenty of
line: somewhere. Turn the rover's radio on and leave it on. We can contact it through
line: Orbit, which is 4.1kps. But the Hermes flyby wil be 5.8kps.”
line: “He can electrolyze urine, so we only need to set a few liters aside for the last couple of days.”
line: insulation on the inner side of the hul. We don't need it. We'l have Watney wear his EVA suit for the whole trip.”
line: “Wow,” Venkat said. “We're realy gutting this thing.”
line: Venkat rubbed his forehead. “By al means, tel me the nasty stuff.”
line: time the ship's going fast enough for air resistance to matter, it'l be high enough that there's practicaly no air. We've run al the simulations.
line: “An engine?”
line: “It's al we've got, Venk,” Bruce said. “We've tested it al out and run simulations galore. We should be ok if everything works the way
line: [09:24]HOUSTON: There will be Hab canvas covering the holes. It will provide
line: to get stuff into it. But it won't be that bad.
line: method of piling everything into the trailer. They had me do a ful systems check on every single component.
line: “Shouldn't have been a mission failure,” Martinez said. “I should have noticed the readout was wrong. It was way off.”
line: Leaving the control room, Lewis made her way to the reactor. Climbing “up” the ladder toward the center of the ship, the centripetal
line: Floating to the other side of the core, Lewis took the other ladder out, again gaining gravity as she went “down”. She made her way to
line: a moving train. Anything more than that and I might miss.”
line: “Not an option.” Lewis said.
line: systems, and the control panels.
line: colecting the hydrogen. I don't have any equipment for puling hydrogen out of the air. The Atmospheric Regulator doesn't even know how.
line: al the safeties and set it to pul 100% of the oxygen out. After it was done, al that was left was hydrogen. That's why I started out with an atmosphere of pure oxygen. So the regulator could separate it later.
line: [19:23]MAV: Johanssen!? Holy crap! They finally letting you talk to me directly?
line: [19:27]MAV: Roger. So uh... thanks for coming back to get me.
line: [19:29]MAV: I've really missed you guys.
line: “Al right,” Lewis said, “tomorrow's the big day.”
line: MMU are prepped and ready.”
line: scientific experiments are suspended. Sleep if you can, run diagnostics on your equipment if you can't.”
line: “Cal me if anything happens,” Mitch said. “If not, I'l see you tomorrow.”
line: “The media loves a drama,” he sighed. “It'l be over tomorrow, one way or another.”
line: I'd be lying if I said I wasn't shitting myself. In 4 hours, I'm going to ride a giant explosion into orbit. This is something I've done a few times before, but never with a jury-rigged mess like this.
line: If I miss the intercept I'l just float around in space until I run out of air. I have a contingency plan for that. I'l drop the oxygen mixture to zero and breathe pure nitrogen until I suffocate. It wouldn't feel bad. The lungs don't have the ability to sline: In Chicago, a couple clutched each other's hands as they watched. The man held his wife gently as she rocked back and forth out of
line: “Go,” said Martinez.
line: “Go,” said Beck from the airlock.
line: “Eager to get up there, Commander,” Watney responded.
line: through the open outer door to the red planet below.
line: “Ja.”
line: “Fine,” Beck said. “But I bet you'l change your mind if push comes to shove.”
line: “Hmm,” he said to nobody. “I wonder how much longer-”
line: “That's low,” Lewis said. “Too low.”
line: But then he was distracted by a bolt in one of the bulkheads. It only had five sides. He wondered why NASA decided that bolt needed
line: “Back on track with ful acceleration,” Johanssen said. “Must have been drag. MAV's out of the atmosphere now.”
line: “Can't say for sure,” Johanssen said. “Al I have is accelerometer data. We'l need radar pings at intervals to work out his true final
line: Martinez and Lewis stared intensely at Johanssen as she brought up the intercept calculation software. Normaly, orbits would be
line: “Negative, Commander,” Martinez responded. “They ditched the OMS system to lighten the launch weight.”
line: “Al right, if you used the other 80 percent-”
line: “Then we have 39 minutes to figure out how to slow down,” Lewis said. “Martinez, burn the jets.”
line: “So... problem solved?” Annie said hopefuly.
line: “Yeah,” Venkat agreed.
line: He shook his head. “I got nothin', Commander. We're just going too damn fast.”
line: pain in his chest.
line: “I'm on a ship with no control panel,” he said. “That's as much as I can tel you.”
line: “42 meters per second.”
line: “I could find something sharp in here and poke a hole in the glove of my EVA suit. I could use the escaping air as a thruster and fly my way to you. The source of thrust would be on my arm, so I'd be able to direct it pretty easily.”
line: “Standby,” Lewis said.
line: Johanssen and Martinez looked at each other.
line: direct that thrust.”
line: “It'l be risky,” Beck replied, “13 to match the MAV then another 13 to match Hermes. But it's a hel of a lot better than 42.”
line: “Oh... my god,” Venkat said in the observation room.
line: “A bomb,” Lewis confirmed. “You're a chemist. Can you make a bomb out of stuff on board?”
line: “Ja,” Vogel said. “I wil use threaded stopper with a smal hole for the wires. It wil have little effect on the seal.”
line: “I am just re-entering now, Commander.”
line: “Right,” Lewis said. “I need you to go to the VAL, depressurize, and lock the outer door open. Then you'l need to crawl along the hul
line: “How?”
line: “Smart-ass.”
line: He quickly driled a hole in the stopper, then stripped a section of wire. He ran the wire through the hole.
line: “Don't tel anyone I liked it,” Beck smiled.
line: “I'l have to pin the breaker,” Johanssen said, “but it'l work.”
line: “Take your time and get it right,” Lewis said. “And don't execute til I give you the word. We're not spinning the ship around while
line: you're both tethered in.”
line: “Copy,” Lewis said. “Time to intercept?”
line: “20 seconds,” Johanssen said.
line: “2... 1...” Johanssen continued. “Activating Panel 41.”
line: After four seconds, the shaking died down and the ship returned to weightlessness.
line: “Score!” Watney responded.
line: Beck thrusted on an intercept course. He had practiced this many times. The presumption in those practice sessions was that he'd be
line: “3.1 meters per second,” Johanssen reported.
line: managed to grab hold.
line: “How ya doin', man?” Beck said, puling himself in to the ship.
line: The two men floated across the MAV cabin to the opening. Beck reached out his arm and pushed off the edge as they passed through.
line: remainder of the rope with both hands. He didn't clamp down on it; that would pul him out of the airlock. He simply closed his hands over the tether to create friction.
line: way around them and closed the outer door.
line: cheering wildly. He looked at Venkat and let out a heavy sigh of relief.
line: If this were a movie, everyone would have been in the airlock and there would have been high-fives al around. But it didn't pan out that way.
line: times if needed. It'd be a pretty shitty long-range ship if it couldn't recover from a decompression.
line: This is the happiest day of my life.
line: “Sweetie,” the boy's mom said, embarrassed. “Don't bother people like that.”
line: “Ok time to go,” the mom said, quickly herding the boy away. They receded in to the crowded sidewalk.
