line: I don’t even know who’l read this. I guess someone wil find it eventualy. Maybe a hundred years from now.
line: was the very lowest ranked member of the crew. I would only be “in command” of the mission if I were the only remaining person.
line: orbits.
line: vessels in the same general area, and did a reasonably good job. Supplies aren’t nearly so fragile as humans and can hit the ground realy hard. But they tended to bounce around a lot.
line: You can imagine how disappointed I was when I discovered the MAV was gone.
line: Our main communications dish, which relayed signals from the Hab to Hermes, acted like a parachute, getting torn from its foundation
line: in the suit (and a hole in me, of course).
line: equipment that could break CO2 apart and give the oxygen back. But the spacesuits had to be portable, so they used a simple chemical
line: Carefuly reaching to the side of my helmet, I got the breach kit. It’s nothing more than a funnel with a valve at the smal end, and an
line: way in to an airlock. As soon as it equalized, I threw off my helmet.
line: p safer and shorter the earlier you left, so why wait for no reason just to make the trip take longer?
line: Hab designed to last 31 days.
line: That way if one or two probes had problems, we'd stil have enough food to complete the mission.
line: Both rovers are half-buried in sand, but they’re in good shape otherwise. Their pressure seals are in-tact. Makes sense. Operating
line: absorbs the CO2 the same way the spacesuits do. It’s intended to last 5 days before it saturates the filters, which means 30 days for me (just one person breathing, instead of six). So there’s some insurance there.
line: Everyone on the mission had two specialties. I’m a botanist and mechanical engineer. Basicaly, I was the mission’s fix-it man who
line: Of course, I don’t have any plan for surviving 4 years on 1 year of food. But one thing at a time here. For now, I’m wel fed and have a
line: Communicating from Mars to Earth is a pretty big deal, and requires extremely specialized equipment. I won’t be able to whip something
line: Why bring a botanist to Mars? After al, it’s famous for not having anything growing here. Wel, the idea was to figure out how wel
line: year.
line: The Hab has sophisticated toilets. Shit is usualy vaccum-dried, then accumulated in sealed bags to be discarded on the surface.
line: My asshole is doing as much to keep me alive as my brain.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 15
line: earned a ful meal.
line: liters total in the Hab.
line: puked from the smel.
line: Al that work was great for my morale. It gave me something to do. But after things settled down a bit, and I had dinner while listening
line: Potatoes grow continualy, so in those 76 days, I can grow another 22,000 calories of potatoes, which wil tide me over for another 15
line: I need to create calories. And I need enough to last four years. I figure if I don’t get rescued by Ares 4, I’m dead anyway. So that’s my target: four years.
line: I need more surface area for farming, and I need water to hydrate the soil. So let’s take the problems one at a time.
line: There are a lot of problems with using pop-tents as farmland, but they have 10 square meters of floor space each. Presuming I can
line: sustainable. But who gives a shit? I just need to survive four years.
line: Bleh. I’m going to bed.
line: It was about time for another dirt-doubling, so I figured I may as wel get it over with. It took an hour. One more doubling and the
line: Normaly, it takes 90 days to yield ful sized potatoes. But I can’t wait that long. I’l need to cut up al the potatoes from this crop to
line: they wanted, and I was tired of listening to Johanssen’s Beatles Albums for now. Time to see what Lewis had.
line: the airlock with your side of it, get in. equalize with the other side, get out. This means you lose a lot of air each use. And I’l need to get in there at least once a day. The total volume of each pop tent is pretty low, so I can’t afford to lose ailine: So I finaly decided I’d just take the hit. I’l be losing some air every time I enter or exit a pop-tent. The good news is each pop-tent
line: equalized by the Hab) I got the dirt in.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 30
line: Anyway, the reserve oxygen would only be enough to make 100L of water (50L of O2 makes 100L of molecules that only have one
line: My crewmates took the MAV away weeks ago. But the bottom half of it stayed behind. NASA is not in the habit of putting
line: I often talk about the MAV. But now I want to talk about the MDV.
line: Not because of the perfect landing, but because he left so much fuel behind. Hundreds of liters of unused Hydrazine. Each molecule of
line: Al you have to do is run it over a catalyst (which I can extract from the MDV engine) and it wil turn in to nitrogen and hydrogen. I’l
line: same after this fiasco. Time wil tel.
line: Also, there’s the problem of storing the hydrogen. The air tanks of the Hab, the rovers, and al the space suits add up to exactly 374L
line: Then, I’l release Hydrazine, VERY SLOWLY, over the iridium catalyst, to turn it in to N2 and H2. I’l direct the hydrogen to a smal
line: as humidity, but the Water Reclaimer wil pul it out.
line: I’ve known since Sol 6 there was a good chance I’d die here. But I figured it would be when I ran out of food. I didn’t think it would
line: back-of-the-napkin math told me even one tank was enough to blow the whole Hab up, so why not bring them al in?
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 33 (2)
line: One thing I have in abundance here is bags. They’re not much different than kitchen trash bags, though I’m sure they cost $50,000
line: Next, I sacrificed a spacesuit to the cause. I needed an air hose. I have a surplus of space suits, after al. A total of seven; one for each crewmember and one spare. So I don’t mind murdering one of them.
line: flowing to feed a flame without kiling myself. Too narrow a margin there.
line: No not realy. I vented pure oxygen at the stick and gave it a spark. Fucker lit up like a match.
line: Wel that took a realy long time. I’ve been at it al night with the Hydrazine. But I got the job done.
line: Remember the spacesuit I vandalized yesterday? I hung it on its rack and carried buckets of water to it from the reclaimer. It can hold
line: I guess I should explain what happened. If this is my last entry, you’l at least know why.
line: I get 10L of CO2 every 15 hours now that I souped up the pump. I’ve done this process four times. My math tels me that, including
line: At first, I thought “Yay! More oxygen! Now I can make water faster!” But then a more disturbing thought occurred to me.
line: I’ve been hiding here in the rover ever since.
line: I thought about the Atmospheric Regulator. It pays attention to what’s in the air and balances it. That’s how the excess O2 I've been
line: There are four different safety interlocks that prevent the regulator from letting the Hab’s oxygen content get too low. But they’re
line: It’s half a solution anyway.
line: Soil bacteria are used to winters. They get less active, and require less oxygen to survive. I can lower the Hab temperature to 1C, and
line: It was surprisingly annoying to find a way to make the heat stay on when the rover’s unoccupied. But I figured it out. After al, I’ve got nothing but time in here.
line: I summoned up the courage to return to the Hab. Once I got there, I felt a little more confident. Everything was how I’d left it (what did I expect? Martians looting my stuff?)
line: l cold. I climbed in to my bunk and under the covers for more warmth.
line: spacesuit (Johanssen’s this time). In the back of the bag, I poked a smal hole and taped it over the remaining intake.
line: I grabbed Vogel’s suit and activated the internal air sensors while leaving the helmet off. Once the oxygen dropped to 12% I put the
line: I was elated! This was the best plan ever! Not only was I clearing out the hydrogen, I was making more water!
line: before I passed out.
line: The shril low-oxygen alarm blared throughout the Hab as the regulator dumped pure oxygen in to the atmosphere as fast as it safely
line: And that’s where I am now. Wondering what the hel happened.
line: I did the most critical tests first. Number one was the integrity of the Hab canvas. I felt pretty confident it was in good shape, cause I’d spent a few hours asleep in the rover before returning to the Hab, and the pressure was stil good. The computer line: made some slides.
line: dropped down again, so where did that extra pressure go? Raising the temperature and keeping the same number of atoms inside should
line: The medical O2 tank mixes pure oxygen with surrounding air, then feeds it to you through a mask. The mask stays on your face with a
line: I’m realy going to have to be more careful.
line: I slept in late today. I deserved it. After four nights of awful sleep in the rover, my bunk felt like the softest, most profoundly beautiful featherbed ever made.
line: when they’re not in the car?
line: in the face of adversity.
line: “Good,” Teddy said, walking in. “Let’s get back to work, then.”
line: would only cost a fraction of a normal mission. It normaly takes 14 presupply probes to prep a site. We might be able to send what’s
line: might stil be in one piece.
line: Teddy looked down. “We’re a public domain organization. There’s no such thing as secret or secure information here.”
line: “The media’s obsession with Watney’s death is finaly starting to taper off,” Teddy said evenly. “It’s been bad press after bad press for two months. Today’s memorial gives people closure, and the media can move on to some other story. The laline: purpose of the mission, but we make it clear that would be part of it. If we framed it that way, we’d get more support in Congress. But not if we wait a year. In a year, people won’t care any more.”
line: image, she recognized the numbers.
line: she picked up her phone.
line: “Um,” she said, looking down. “Um, it’s. Wel. The imagery you ordered. Um. Come here and look.”
line: Venkat looked again. “Hmm. Probably right.”
line: “They activated two emergency pop tents and never told anyone?”
line: Mindy put her hands over her face and sobbed quietly.
line: SatCon for noticing al that, by the way.
line: Sol 5.”
line: “They have another ten months on their trip home,” Teddy explained. “Space travel is dangerous. They need to be alert and
line: along with them. We don’t want people working it out on their own. We’d look like assholes.”
line: “Annie, make sure nobody gets wind of this til we announce.”
line: looking forward to the conversation.”
line: “-for him to get it.” Chuck finished.
line: “Sorry if I’m grumpy,” Venkat said. “I got like 2 hours sleep last night.”
line: “No, it’s four,” Chuck corrected.
line: Chuck shrugged. “Never occurred to us. We never thought someone would be on Mars without an MAV.”
line: press conference with Q&A in about an hour. We have recently reviewed satelite imagery from Mars, and have confirmed that astronaut
line: this shamelessly every way we can.”
line: answers to these questions are not what we want to hear.
line: Venkat sat down.
line:  4 site on a lateral trajectory that’s, wel, realy scary. Then they have an MAV. This would require a massive design and construction effort, but JPL says they can
line: “Wel. That’s a ludicrous idea and I’l never ok it.”
line: He turned back to Venkat. “I wonder what he’s thinking right now.”
line: Won’t be easy.
line: 650km is nice, smooth terrain (Yay Acidalia Planitia!) but the rest of it is nasty, rugged, crater-pocked hel.
line: There’s too much shit to think about al at once. So for now, I’l just think about power.
line: The rover has good insulation, too. It’l have to be enough; I need every bit of power.
line: Thanks to the fine taxpayers of America, I have over 100 of square meters of the most expensive solar paneling ever made. It has an
line: undercarriage and it dropped right out. The cabling is easy to detach, too. It’s just a couple of complicated plugs.
line: hen re-inflate and
line: Yay!
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 65
line: ver.
line: (which is about 40 Earth days), and it was time to reap and re-sow.
line: The time has come (ominous musical crescendo) for some missions!
line: More accurately, Sirius 1 was aborted after 1 hour. I guess you could cal it a “failure” but I prefer the term “learning experience.”
line: Within an hour, I was chattering and numb. Enough was enough. There’s no way I could do a long trip like this. The test was over.
line: I’m going to use the RTG.
line: death!
line: 100 Watts isn’t enough to keep the heater going, but I don’t care about the electrical output. I want the heat. A 1500 Watt heater is so warm I’l have to tear insulation out of the rover to keep it from getting too hot.
line: the battery harness holds up to a real journey, and how wel the solar cels do strapped to the roof.
line: No point in putting it on the roof; my plan was to have it in the cabin anyway. So I brought it in with me, turned off the heater, then
line: foam insulation (hammer again).
line: Today, I write to you from the rover. I’m halfway-through Sirius 3 and things are going wel.
line: What’s that, you say? 12 hours is wrong? I said 13 hours earlier? Wel, my friend, let me set you straight.
line: than food. I need 2L per day to be comfortable.
line: pressure differential to deal with). Why does that matter? It means I can bring along other oxygen tanks, and equalize them with the rover’s tanks without having to do an EVA.
line: every surface. That’l keep the potatoes wel watered while I’m away.
line: on the crops, and head out.
line: view. The European Space Agency has both of theirs doing the same.”
line: “Hmm,” Cathy said, “Most analysts think Mark’s only hope of rescue is to get to the Ares 4 site. Do you think he’s come to the same
line: “Communication would be a great thing. But traversing 3,200km to Ares 4 is incredibly dangerous. We’d rather he stayed put. If we could talk to him, we’d certainly tel him that.”
line: “No idea,” Venkat said. “But we’re going to do everything we can to bring him home alive.”
line: “So,” said Hermes Flight Director Mitch Henderson “Who are you, again?”
line: “She gets a promotion cause she was in the hot seat when the imagery came through?”
line: has figured it out yet.”
line: Bruce sighed. “The MDV wasn’t made for liftoff and lateral flight. Packing more fuel in doesn’t help. We’d need a bigger engine and
line: “Thank you, sir.”
line: “No, you discussed it,” Mitch interrupted. “They think they lost a crewmate. They’re devastated.”
line: “I know you’re upset,” Teddy said calmly, “We’l make it right. Just as soon as we have some idea how to save Watney.”
line: They’re not ready yet.
line: “There’s also the booster,” Venkat said. “The only way to get a probe to Mars with the planets in their current positions is to spend a
line: “NASA’s a large organization,” he typed. “It doesn’t deal with sudden change well. The only reason we’re getting away with it
line: “He’s on the move,” she said.
line: “I don’t think he’s going to Ares 4,” Mindy said. “If he is, he’s taking a weird path.”
line: Washington, I understand the Ares 3 mission caused a Postal Service first. Can you explain to our viewers?”
line: Marcus chuckled. “Maybe. But not too much. Like I said, thousands were sold. They’l be rare, but not super rare.”
line: “Wel,” Irene said, “He’s very inteligent. Al of them are, of course. But he’s particularly resourceful and a good problem-solver.”
line: “Yes they do, unfortunately,” Irene confirmed. “The higher-ups decided to keep it from them, at least for now. I’m sure it wasn’t an
line: “Is there another?”
line: “We’ve been thinking about that,” said Bruce. “We’ve got some ideas.”
line: Mars’s atmosphere. Each ribbon wil have ‘MARK: TURN ON YOUR COMM’ printed on it. We’re working on a release mechanism
line: “Wil do.”
line: “What?” Mindy asked.
line: draw on that.”
line: Using the notebook as a straight-edge, Venkat drew a line from the Hab to Mark’s location and beyond. Then took a step back.
line: Smiling for the first time in weeks, he held the phone to his ear and awaited a response. “Bruce? It’s Venkat. Everything just changed.
line: The rover has no toilet. We were expected to use our suits’ reclamation systems for that. But they aren’t designed to hold twenty days
line: speed. It’s comfortable inside. I wear hastily made cut-offs and a thin shirt while the RTG bakes the interior. When it gets too hot I detach the insulation duct-taped to the hul. When it gets too cold, I tape it back up.
line: I have shitty ‘70’s TV to watch, and a bunch of Poirot novels. But mostly I spend my time thinking about getting to Ares 4. I’l have to
line: As I mentioned, it’s been a long, boring drive. And I’m stil on the outward leg. But hey, I’m an astronaut. Long-ass trips are my
line: history.
line: There’s probably symbolism there. Phobos is the god of fear, and I’m letting it be my guide. Not a good sign.
line: Almost made it to Pathfinder today, but I ran out of juice. Just another 22km to go!
line: It’s a strange feeling. Everywhere I go, I’m the first. Step outside the rover? First guy ever to be there! Climb a hil? First guy to climb that hil! Kick a rock? That rock hadn’t moved in a milion years!
line: I’m the first person to be alone on an entire planet.
line: It’s actualy two separate components. The Lander itself, and the Sojourner rover. The Lander was immobile, while Sojourner
line: I quickly deposited Sojourner in my rover. It’s smal, light, and easily fit in the airlock. The Lander was a different story.
line: I could cut off the baloons, but I’d have to dig to get to them. It wouldn’t be hard, it’s just sand. But the other three panels were in the damn way.
line: So I dragged it to the rover.
line: You may think Sojourner isn’t much use to me. It can’t communicate with Earth. Why do I care about it?
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 83
line: n 20 minutes.
line: Tearing the ramp down was easier than putting it up. I didn’t need to carefuly put each rock in a stable place. I just dropped them
line: But al good things come to an end. I’m back in Acidalia Planitia now. My outgoing tracks are long gone. It’s been 16 days since I was
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 92
line: So far, Pathfinder hasn’t tried kil me. But I’m keeping an eye on it.
line: At this point I’d welcome a health lecture.
line:  than anyone has ever been.
line: the plants hadn’t suffocated without me exhaling for them.
line: p.
line: originaly dumped it, I ditched it in the same hole and drove back to the Hab.
line: Setting it on my workbench, I pried open a panel to peek inside. The battery was a lithium thionyl chloride non-rechargeable. I figured
line: “fuck you” from Mars to your lander. Eventualy it’s using more power to keep warm than it’s getting from the meager daylight that makes
line: labels everything. It’s a 40 Amp-hour Ag-Zr battery with an optimal voltage of 1.5V. Wow. They realy made those things run on nothin’
line: directly to power. I could easily fry the whole system.
line: tronaut.
line: Sojourner’s also showing no signs of life. It’s been in the nice, warm environment of the Hab al night, with plenty of light on its
line: PERFORMING HARDWARE CHECK:
line: IMAGER: OK
line: LISTENING FOR TELEMETRY SIGNAL...
line: The room itself was formerly a conference room; JPL had no space ready for the sudden need. Crammed with computers and
line: “What now?” Venkat asked.
line: “It says the imager’s working. We’l have it take a panorama as soon as we can.”
line: Pathfinder to take a panoramic image. Hopefuly, Watney has some kind of message for us. Questions?”
line: another reporter, he said “You, there.”
line: conversation, won’t it?”
line: Bruce pushed his way forward. “Stil another few seconds on the clock,” he said.
line: Applause filed the room, then quickly died down. “What’s it say?” someone asked.
line: Venkat folded his arms. “Al right. We have communication with Mark. Tim, point the camera at ‘Yes’. Then, start taking pictures at
line: know what kind of halucinogenic crap that ink is made of, but I’m pretty sure it would boil off in 1/90th of an atmosphere.
line: ASCII table in there somewhere. Al computer geeks do.
line: soil. Note: Situation not Ares 3 crew’s fault. Bad luck.
line: damn day. Any ideas?
line: “I was up al night,” said Venkat. “Forgive me if I’m a little punchy. Who are you again?”
line: “Ok, how does this help us?”
line: “Not directly,” Jack said. “But we can send data to Watney, and have him enter it in to the rover.”
line: “Ok, so what?”
line: “Just like that?”
line: “You’re talking to him with a fucking camera. How hard can it be?”
line: meet in the middle!”
line: I don’t want to forget any letters, so I scrape them in to the dirt with a rod. The process of looking up a letter and scraping it in the dirt takes a couple of seconds. Sometimes when I look back at the camera, I’ve missed a number. I can usualy guesline: smoothed out a big area of dirt. I found the longest antenna rod I had, so I could reach in to the smooth area without having to step on it.
line: Even the faceplate would reflect too much light. Stil, it’s what they want.
line: “Fine, fine,” Annie said. “But I want a pic of his face ASAP.”
line: “That’s fine,” Venkat said. “Take your time, do it right.”
line: “Watney’s not my only responsibility,” Venkat said. “I’ve got five other astronauts in deep space, who have to concentrate on their
line: It died instantly. The screen went black before I was out of the airlock. Turns out the “L” in “LCD” stands for “Liquid.” I guess it either froze or boiled off. Maybe I’l post a consumer review. “Brought product to surface of Mars. It stopline: “Should be pretty much instant,” Jack answered. “Watney entered the hack earlier today, and we confirmed it worked. We updated
line: “System’s online,” said Tim.
line: together a supply mission to keep you fed till Ares 4 arrives.
line: prepare on Thanksgiving. They’re doing great, but the available farmland isn’t
line: “Thank you, Mr. President,” Teddy said in to the phone. “I appreciate the cal, and I’l pass your congratulations on to the whole
line: “Yes,” Mitch said.
line: Teddy swiveled in his chair and looked out his windows to the night sky. He pondered the faint, red dot amongst the stars. “Hang in
line: said crisply.
line: Puling the pilow from Watney’s hands, Lewis said “Let’s move, Watney! Uncle Sam paid $100,000 for every second we’l be here.”
line: “Beck, what’l you have?” Watney continued.
line: “Pretty sure that’s a no,” Watney guessed.
line: “Coming to Mars was needlessly dangerous,” Lewis said. “What’s your point?”
line: “Wil do.” Lewis said. “Stay within 100 meters of the Hab,” she added.
line: “So that’s how you want to play it?” Lewis said.
line: “Technicaly 150kph,” Martinez said. “Any more than that and the MAV’s in danger of tipping.”
line: Hab, so be ready.”
line: “Something hit him!” Johanssen reported.
line: “Ok,” Lewis said. “Martinez, get to the MAV and prep for launch. Everyone else, home in on Johanssen.”
line: flight-ready status. As they came online, he noted one in particular.
line: “Understood,” Lewis said. “Continue prepping for launch.”
line: “Affirmative,” Martinez replied. “I can launch any time.”
line: They reluctantly obeyed Lewis’s order, and made their way toward the MAV. The punishing wind fought them every step of the way.
line: “Negative,” Johanssen replied. “IR can’t get through sand any better than visible light.”
line: “Commander,” said Beck, putting on a headset as he slid in to his acceleration couch. “I know you don’t want to hear this, but Watn-
line: “Strap in!” he yeled to the crew. “We’re tipping!”
line: the lumbering mass of the slowly tilting spacecraft.
line: “It is working,” Vogel said.
line: “Almost there…” Johanssen said. “Ok we’re under 12.3.”
line: They lay in silence, strapped to their couches and ready for launch. Beck looked at Watney’s empty couch and saw Vogel doing the
line: engines, and the MAV lurched upward.
line: unknown area of the planet below.
line: Beck tried not to think about the painful reason he was doing zero-g plant growth experiments. He noted the size and shape of the fern
line: and videos from home. It was the high point of the day.
line: Lewis shrugged. “Play it.”
line: Martinez looked to Lewis. She leaned forward and pinched her chin.
line: “He…He’s alive?” Martinez said, then smiled.
line: Lewis trudged off the bridge.
line: awesome to have a bunch of dipshits on Earth teling me, a botanist, how to grow plants.
line: the Hab. But hey, I can’t bitch. My odds of living through this are way higher now.
line: All chemical reactions complete, the sheet was sterilized and moved to a cleanroom. There, a worker cut a strip off the edge.
line: They’l launch next year during the Hohmann Transfer Window, and it’l take almost 9 months to get here. It should arrive around Sol
line: -Martinez
line: The package was placed on a charter plane and flown to Edwards Air Force Base in California. It flew abnormally high, at
line: My re-seed of the potatoes went wel. I'm beginning to see that crops on Mars are extremely prolific, thanks to the bilions of dolars
line: Mark, some answers to your earlier questions:
line: want to see if there were any avoidable mistakes that led you to being stranded.
line: -Watney
line: Then it waited 23 months.
line: think I’l die instantly without it. To them, equipment failure is terrifying. To me, it’s “Tuesday.”
line: Airlock 1. Beck stretched the sheet tight to the seal-strips on the airlock’s exterior.
line: they spend al day working on how to save my life.
line: Water Reclaimer.
line: carbon fibers to separate.
line: When pressurized, the airlock expanded slightly; when depressurized, it shrunk. Every time the astronaut used the airlock, the
line: When I head outside, I’l confirm Pathfinder’s stil functional before moving on to the sweaty, annoying work of the day.
line: sure the storm didn’t hurt it. Then I’l need to do the same for the rover.
line: The ful force of the Hab’s atmosphere rushed through the breach. Within a tenth of a second, the rip was a meter long, running paralel
line: Finaly done tumbling, the airlock rested on its side amid a cloud of dust.
line: Chapter 14
line: Also, during the… whatever the fuck happened… I got bounced around like a pinbal and smashed my faceplate. Air is notoriously
line: Not sure what happened to the Hab, but the rover’s probably fine. It’s not ideal, but at least it’s not leaky phone booth.
line: I don’t see anything… I can hear it, but… it’s down here somewhere, but I don’t know where.
line: hairs off into a little pile.
line: AUDIO LOG: SOL 119
line: The fourth time I kept the suit turned off, held my breath, and when the time came to light the fire, I did it very slowly. Then I watched as the little wisp of smoke drifted toward the floor of the airlock, disappearing through a hairline fracture.
line: I’m down to 40% of my N2 tank. I need to seal that fracture now, and I need to do it without using the patch kit.
line: RECORDING:
line: can even cut it. Remember when I was cutting Hab canvas in to strips? Those same sheers are right here in my tool kit.
line: And where wil that “safety” be? Not a damn clue.
line: arm’s seam.
line: The suit is designed for 8 hours of use. That works out to 250ml of liquid oxygen. Just to be safe, the suit has a ful liter of O2 capacity.
line: Checking the readouts, I have 410ml of oxygen, 738ml of nitrogen. Together, they make almost 1150ml to work with. That, divided by
line: I need to fix the Hab. I know what to do; we practiced it in training. But it’l take a long time. I’l have to scrounge around in the now-colapsed canvas to get the spare material for patching. Then I have to find the breach and seal-strip a patch in pline: Next problem: I’m like 50 meters from the Hab. Running in 0.4g while wearing a bulky EVA suit isn’t easy. At best, I can trundle 2
line: Next, I tried doing a super-pushup to get airborne (0.4g yay!) then kicking the wal with both feet. Again, it just slid.
line: The subtle and refined “hurl my body at the wal” technique had some flaws. It only worked one out of every 10 tries, and it hurt a lot. I had to take breaks, stretch out, and generaly convince myself to body-slam the wal again and again.
line: Deep breath… here we go!
line: I had to look at a rippled, messed-up version of the outside world. The faceplate patch wasn’t exactly smooth or reflective. Stil, it was enough to see what was going on.
line: “Yay!” I naively thought. “Problem solved.”
line: NASA’s probably pretty worried about me by now. They probably saw the airlock move back to the Hab, so they know I’m alive,
line: First thing I did was re-seal the arm. Last time, I had to spread the resin pretty thin; I’d used most of it for the faceplate patch. But this time I had a whole patch kit just for the arm. I got a perfect seal.
line: After refiling, and making sure the suit was stil not leaking, I had a few immediate tasks to take care of. Much as I trust my handiwork, I wanted a two-armed suit.
line: The hole where Airlock 1 used to be is huge, but surmountable. I have seal-strips and spare canvas. It’l be a lot of work, but I can get the Hab together again. Once I do, I’l re-establish power and get Pathfinder back online. From there, NASA can telline: So are earthworms and soil bacteria. I’l never grow another plant so long I’m here.
line: Project Iris
line: power back online. Primary air and water tanks were unharmed. The rover, solar
line: idea what caused the Hab to blow up?
line: [09:44]JPL: Yeah, we figured. Working on it.
line: “Where's the booster coming from?”asked Norm Toshi, who was in charge of the reentry process.
line: “And we don't need a precision landing. Watney can travel hundreds of kilometers if necessary. We just need to land close enough for
line: started with 900L (300 to start with, 600 more from reducing hydrazine). So I lost
line: With a relieved sigh, he sank back in his chair. Checking the clock on his computer, he shook his head. 3:42am.
line: It wasn't that bad. Nowhere near the pain of calculating orbits for Hermes. I know you get bored when I go in to the math, so
line: Grabbing his coffee cup, he went to the break room for a refil.
line: “Media?” Teddy said, turning to Annie Montrose.
line: “I can find money for overtime,” Teddy offered.
line: “Al right,” Teddy said. “Let's create 15 days.”
line: “He's right,” Dr. Keler confirmed. “Within 4 days of running out of food, he'l barely be able to stand up, let alone control a rover. Plus, his mental faculties wil rapidly decline. He'd have a hard time even staying awake.”
line: “Uh,” Maurice stammered. “Are you suggesting we don't do the inspections?”
line: “Al right, then. Speeding up the mounting process and skipping inspections buys us 11 days. If Bruce can pul a rabbit out of a hat and
line: “Rich,” said Mike.
line: “You need supercomputer time to calculate routine satelite adjustments?”
line: “I'm on vacation,” Rich said without looking up.
line: [08:47]JPL: That's what we're thinking. We'll get you a schedule as soon as the
line: The shift leader tightened the final bolt. As he retracted the wrench, the engineers broke in to applause. Many of them were in tears.
line: “Any disco?” someone asked.
line: “Do you believe in God, Venkat?” Mitch asked.
line: “Go.” came the response.
line: “QAM3.”
line: briefcase lay at his feet and he held a blue folder in his hands.
line: “Go.”
line: Milions of kilometers away, the crew of Hermes listened as they crowded around Johanssen's station. The 2-minute transmission time
line: “Roger that Houston,” Launch Control said, “Launch on schedule.”
line: “6... 5... 4...”
line: “On course.”
line: “Keep an eye on it,” Mitch said.
line: protein cubes inside did not.
line: adjusting the engines' thrusts to counteract. We're stil good.”
line: stage, the acceleration was profound. The 300kg of sludge slammed in to the back of its container. The point of impact was at the edge of Iris, nowhere near where the mass was expected to be.
line: Iris slipped from its supports in the payload bulb, slamming in to the hul.
line: “Can you get it to orbit?”
line: “Shit,” Mitch said. “It shook loose in the bay.”
line: “Ground?” Mitch asked.
line: It was the signal to start post-failure procedures.
line: Dr. Shields says I need to write personal messages to each of the crew. She says
line: Guo Ming, Director of the China National Space Administration, examined the expansive paperwork at his desk. In the old days, when
line: A knock at the door interrupted his paperwork.
line: “I am happy to report they are al on-schedule.”
line: “It's the Taiyang Shen's booster, Sir. Our engineers have run the numbers, and it has enough fuel for a Mars injection orbit. It could get there in 419 days.”
line: “941 kilograms, Sir.”
line: “That's right around when we planned to launch Taiyang Shen.”
line: Department won't trade anything major for one man's life.”
line: Zhu Tao stood. “Of course,” he smiled. “The Ares 5 crew hasn't even been selected yet. We'l insist on a crewman. One we get to pick
line: Mars. You're on dorm-room walls all over the world.
line: Anyway. Try not to think about all those guys wanking to your poster.
line: Bruce nodded. “You heard me. No landing system. We'l need guidance for in-flight course adjustments. But once it gets to Mars, it's
line: “Team Two wil deal with the payload. They need to find a way to contain the food during impact. If protein bars hit sand at 300m/s,
line: Venkat stared forlornly at his once clean desk, now strewn with scores of printouts.
line: “Oh sorry, am I being difficult?” Rich asked. “I'm not good with people. Sometimes I'm difficult. I wish people would just tel me.
line: “I don't have any of those.”
line: I guess NASA figured botany and chemistry are similar because they both end in
line: Frankly, I suspect you're a super villain. You're a chemist, you have a German
line: “Exactly,” Venkat said.
line: Silence.
line: urse. Around that time,
line: 1,500km.”
line: “Yes, with the Taiyang Shen,” Venkat said. “We'd shoot for a near-Earth rendezvous. It's a lot easier than getting a probe to Mars, that's for sure.”
line: “That's right,” Venkat said.
line: “Al right, Mitch,” Teddy said. “You've expressed your opinion, and we've heard it. Let's move on.” He turned to Venkat. “Can
line: “I disagree,” Teddy said. “This is absolutely a discussion about what's safest. And about how many lives are at stake. Both plans are risky, but resupplying Watney only risks one life while the Rich Purnel Maneuver risks six.”
line: “We talk about it, then Teddy makes the decision,” Venkat said. “Not sure what else we can do.”
line: impossible.”
line: But wait till the mission’s over. You're on a ship with her for another two
line: “We'l do al we can to make it work,” Bruce said.
line: “Space is dangerous,” Mitch snapped. “It's what we do here. If you want to play it safe al the time, go join an insurance company. And
line: Teddy looked to her. “Sorry about that, Annie,” he said. “What can I say? Sometimes men let testosterone take over-”
line: You were faced with an impossible scenario and made a tough decision. That’s what
line: collars. But Disco?
line: computers could control al ship's functions. Gone were the days of physicaly visiting the engines to check up on them.
line: “Johanssen. Good evening,” Vogel said. The crew kept the same sleep schedule, and it was nearing bedtime.
line: “Let's take a look,” she said.
line: ranked low in gravity priority. It's position amidships granted it a mere 0.2g.
line: Watney. We'd have to pick up a supply near Earth, and he'd have to get to Ares-4's MAV.”
line: “I won't lie,” she said. “I'd sure as hel like to. But this isn't a normal decision. This is something NASA expressly rejected. We're
line: Martinez leaned against the wal, arms folded with a half grin on his face. The rest silently considered what their commander had said.
line: “But we're right here,” Lewis said. “We can undo whatever they try, right?”
line: “Shouldn't be hard,” Johanssen said. “It's an emergency feature, not a security program. It isn't protected against malicious code.”
line: He rose through the ranks as fast as one could in the large, inertia-bound organization. Known as a diligent worker, his skil and
line: communicate via text until they were much closer.
line: “CAPCOM, advise Hermes they're drifting. Telemetry, get a correction vector ready-”
line: “Roger, Flight.”
line: “You know damn wel what I'm talking about.”
line: “Of course,” Teddy said. “Otherwise we'd look like idiots.”
line: Holy shit!
line: My trip to Pathfinder was a quick jaunt compared to the epic journey that's coming up. I got away with a lot of shortcuts because I
line: Easier to have the crew top off the MAV from the Hab. Fortunately for my crewmates, the mission plan had Martinez fil the MAV tanks
line: NASA is stil working on the details, but the idea is to use both rovers. One to drive around, the other to act as a trailer for al the shit I have to bring.
line: apart, and the length of the total cut is 11.4m. That's 760 holes. And each one
line: So we want you to wire a drill directly to Hab power.
line: As instructed, I turned a rover charging cable into a dril power source. Getting the voltage was a simple matter of adding resistors,
line: Also, unlike my Pathfinder hatchet-job, I had the ful schematics of the dril. I removed the battery and attached a power line where it
line: these are modifications to Rover 1, which we've been calling “the trailer.” Rover 2
line: The rovers are made to interlock so one can tow the other. That way you can rescue your crewmates if the shit hits the fan. For that
line: I can see what NASA has in mind. The rear of the trailer has an airlock that we're not going to mess with. The cut is just ahead of it,
line: Then I had to pick somewhere to start. I thought it'd be easiest to start on the side. I was wrong.
line: I had already removed the dril's cowling (the power cord needed a way in). A pleasant side effect is the dril cools even faster. Though
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 194
line: Anyway, at this rate, it'l take 4 more days of (boring-ass) work to finish the driling.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 195
line: There's stil soil everywhere. No point in lugging it back outside. Lacking anything better to do, I ran some tests on it. Amazingly, some of the bacteria survived. The population is strong and growing. That's pretty impressive, when you consider it was exline: the ass to make a chip before each driling, so I make al the day's chips in a single go.
line: Only three minutes earlier, it was working fine. I had finished a hole and set the dril aside to cool. Same as always.
line: [17:08] Watney: 131 holes today. 488 total. Minor drill issue; it tripped the
line: Back when JPL's Nerd Brigade hacked the rover and Pathfinder to be an poor-man's IM client, they sent me a cheat sheet for
line: 1. Confirm power stil flowing to Pathfinder.
line: I pondered this development. Melted insulation usualy means a short. More current than the wire could handle had passed through. But
line: Between Panel A and the workbench were the Mylar baloons Pathfinder had used to tumble-land. I had shredded many of them to
line: I'm on my own.
line: way.
line: uses 44.1kwh per sol. See my problem?
line: gonna piss and shit on you. That's what you get for trying to kil me al the time.
line: problem. Too much CO2? Take it out. Not enough O2? Add some. Without it, the Oxygenator is worthless. The CO2 needs to be
line: Problem: the regulator takes 21.5pn. Even adding some of the Hab's power cels would barely power the regulator for a sol, let alone
line: see me through to rescue, but a hel of a lot.
line: watts of heat which it uses to harvest 100W of electricity. So what happens to the other 1400W? It gets radiated out as heat.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 200
line: Half a cubic meter of basalt weighs about that much (more or less). After two hours of brutal labor, during which I whined a lot, I got it al loaded in.
line: That's too fucking long. I'l tear my own head off if I have to live in the rover that long. Anyway, I'm exhausted from lifting rocks and whining about lifting rocks. I think I puled something in my back. Gonna take it easy the rest of today.
line: I have some flexible plastic tubing intended for minor Water Reclaimer repairs. After bringing the RTG in to the Hab, I very carefully glued some tubing around the heat baffles. Using a funnel made from a piece of paper, I ran water through the tubing, leline: extra canvass around the edges. Weighing down the excess canvass with rocks, I now had a water-tight bathtub!
line: I spent the last week recovering from back problems. The pain wasn't bad, but there aren't any chiropractors on Mars, so I wasn't
line: give me 38pn to work with, which would net me 5.1 sols of oxygen per air-sol. I'd only have to stop once per five sols. That's much more reasonable.
line: That was enough physical labor for today. I don't want to overdo it.
line: I haven't removed the chunk of hul from the trailer yet. Half the holes are driled, but I'm not committed to anything. If I left it in place, I could have four stacks of seven cels. That would work fine; it's just two rovers worth of what I did for the trline: I went ahead and reinstaled the trailer's battery. It took me two hours but it's out of the way now. I removed the saddlebags and set
line: Cold night last night. The solar cels were stil detached from the farm, so I had to leave the Hab in low-power mode. I did turn the heat back on (I'm not insane), but I set the internal temperature to 1C to conserve power. Waking up to frigid weather was line: Shaping the brackets involved a hammer and... wel that's it, actualy. Making an “L” doesn't take a lot of precision.
line: After some wel-earned fist-pumping, I unloaded the cels and dragged them back to the farm. No Chicago morning for me tomorrow.
line: smal and light, so I'l bring it with me. If something goes wrong with the rover's computer en-route, I'l have a spare.
line: batteries directly in. (No smal feat in the damn EVA suit).
line: Good luck, guys.
line: Hey, are you floating?”
line: Lewis widened her eyes. “Seriously? A 1973 or one of the reprints?”
line: because we're U.S. Government officials... it's gonna be hours before we sleep.”
line: of the China National Space Administration. I wil be your guide and translator during your stay in the People's Republic of China.”
line: “Yes, ” she said. “I'm fine. But I do miss you. ”
line: “S he hasn't worsened? ” He asked.
line: “Yes, thank you,” Teddy said. “The hospitality of your people has been wonderful. The private jet you arranged to bring us here was a
line: Guo Ming laughed. “You can say that,” he said. “I cannot.”
line: “But I thought you were the Doctor.”
line: “I bet that's coming in handy now.”
line: “There may have been an eyebal,” Venkat said. “They hate you.”
line: picking his nose.
line: “So do I,” he said defensively.
line: “Hermes isn't going to orbit Earth,” Venkat said. “It's just passing by on its way to Mars. And its velocity is huge. We need a booster capable of not only escaping Earth's gravity, but matching Hermes's current velocity. Only the Taiyang Shen has eline: “The Ares 3 pilot, Major Rick Martinez. As the probe approaches Hermes, he'l take over and guide it to the docking port.”
line: “Sounds like you're covering al your bases,” Cathy smiled.
line: “I'm sorry,” Johanssen mumbled, looking down.
line: “You were always scientificaly minded,” he said. “It was great! Straight-A student. Hanging around nerdy guys too scared to try
line: “What?” He said. “But what?”
line: “So in exchange for a lifetime of staying out of your business, let me nose in just this once. What are you not teling me?”
line: “And the supplies would last until you got back to Earth?”
line: “Of course,” said Zhu Tao.
line: on Mars, but what science wil he bring back that some other astronaut couldn't have? This operation is a net loss for mankind's
line: open. The bulky SAFER Unit on his back would alow him free motion in space should the need arise. An attached tether led to a spool on
line: “Slight rotation in the probe,” Johanssen said. “Relative rotational velocity is 0.05rps.”
line: “Angle?”
line: “Vogel, return to interior,” she ordered.
line: Martinez and Johanssen floated down the hal toward docking port A.
line: Chapter 20
line: The pressurized area is easily big enough to fit the Oxygenator and Atmospheric Regulator.
line: There's stil a lot to do.
line: as a bunch of little bubbles.
line: evenly.
line: NASA is an American non-military organization, and it owns the Hab. So while I'm in the Hab, American law applies. As soon as I
line: don't judge.
line: I do have one thing going for me. And I swear it's a gift form God. For some geological reason, there's a valey caled Mawrth Valis
line: Rim shot!
line: Also, while traveling, I'l keep it folded up in the rover. In an emergency, I can get to it fast.
line: The pop tent is 1.2m tal. It's not made for comfort. It's made for astronauts to cower in while their crewmates rescue them. I want 2
line: I'l have to depressurize the Hab, cut chunks out, and put it back together (smaler). I spent today figuring out the exact sizes and
line: I saved 5 meal packs for special occasions. I wrote their names on each one. I get to eat “Departure” the day I leave for Schiapareli.
line: My first order of business was a careful inventory of the Hab. I needed to root out anything that would have a problem with losing
line: I suited up and depressurized the Hab. Last time, the canvas colapsed and made a mess of everything. That's not supposed to happen.
line: After mangling the Hab, I puled the remaining canvas down to the flooring and re-sealed it. Ever set up a camping tent? From the
line: It's been a long, physicaly taxing day. I'm totaly exhausted but I can't sleep. Every sound scares the shit out of me. Is that the Hab
line: Assembling the bedroom was way easier than re-sealing the Hab. Because this time, I didn't have to wear an EVA suit. I made the
line: Then I had to test it. Again, I did it in the Hab. I brought an EVA suit in to the tent with me and closed the mini-airlock door. Then I fired up the EVA suit, leaving the helmet off. I told it to bump the pressure up to 1.2 atm.
line: Originaly I planned to let it sit overnight and check in the morning. But I ran in to a problem: I can't get out if I do that. The rover only has one airlock, and the bedroom was attached to it. There was no way for me to get out without detaching the bedline: Air: Rover and trailer combined storage: 14L liquid O2, 14L liquid N2.
line: need some encouragement. I need to ask myself: “What would an Apolo astronaut do?”
line: There's a grim logic to this: If the rover breaches I'm dead. No point in planning around that. But if the trailer breaches, I'l be fine. That means I should put everything important in the rover. If I'm going to die, I may as wel take al the delicate stuline: The rover wil be pretty packed, too. When I'm driving, I'l keep the bedroom folded up near the airlock, ready for emergency egress.
line: 9:10. He showed up in one of them.”
line: “I think he's loading something into the rover.”
line: “That's a demotion,” Mindy said. “I'm an orbital engineer, and you're turning me in to a glorified Peeping Tom.”
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 434
line: big to send whole, so they're easy to dismantle.
line: Once everything assembled, I hooked them in to the trailer's power and watched them power up. I ran both through ful diagnostics to
line: Last night was weird. I knew logically that nothing bad would happen in just one night, but it was a little unnerving to know I had no life support other than heaters. My life depended on some math I did earlier. If I dropped a sign or added two numbers wline: As intended, the pressure from the rover blasted the canvas outward and inflated it. After that, chaos. The sudden pressure popped the
line: I'm out of caffeine pils. No more Martian Coffee for me.
line: So I'm stil running my test, but I don't have to wear the EVA suit.
line: “Uh, yeah,” Mindy said. “Looks like Watney finished the baloon addition to the trailer. It mostly uses the design we sent him.”
line: “Watney's a clever guy,” Mitch said. “How about getting life support in there?”
line: storm has been developing in Arabia Terra. Not a big deal in terms of magnitude. It won't hinder his driving at al.”
line: “The current plan already has him recharging al day long,” Venkat explained. “With 20% of normal daylight, it'l take five times as long
line: he comes out the other side.”
line: On the real trip, I'm going to have 620L of water. I made up the weight difference by loading 600kg of rocks in with my other supplies.
line: have to braid lower gauge lines to carry the current. Also, the power output from the reactor is declining.”
line: “Yes, if the rate of tarnishing doesn't increase.”
line: “Where have you been sleeping?”
line: “If it were a normal mission, I would be,” Lewis said. “But we're way off-script now. Just keep it from interfering with your duties and I'm happy.”
line: Story of my life.
line: isolates the bedroom, with me in it, from the rest of the rover. Then I tel the airlock to depressurize. It thinks it's just pumping the air out of a smal area, but it's actualy deflating the whole bedroom.
line: Once I park, it's back in to the EVA suit for me, and out to Mars again. I lay the solar panels out and get the batteries charging.
line: Once it was done, my test run was complete. It converted al the CO2 to oxygen, and used up the day's power generation to do it.
line: It's al good to go. No problems that I can see.
line: But now there was nothing. I never realized how utterly silent Mars is. It's a desert world with practicaly no atmosphere to convey
line: So far, the rover and my ghetto life support are working admirably. At least, as wel as can be expected for equipment being used ten
line: and the computer has plenty of shitty TV reruns for me to enjoy.
line: “We hope not,” Venkat responded. “But he's got a real chalenge ahead of him.”
line: from now.”
line: “Twelve days,” Cathy said to the camera. “Al of Earth is watching, but powerless to help.”
line: So this time around, I needed a reliable way to fix my position on Mars.
line: I spend 13 hours every sol just sitting around while the solar panels charge the batteries. Phobos is guaranteed to set at least once
line: addressed it to the ever-growing list of people who wanted Watney's daily status message.
line: and decided Mars's elevation zero is wherever the air pressure is 610.5 Pascals. That's about 500 meters up from where I am right now.
line: My first chalenge is to pass between the craters Rutherford and Trouvelot. It shouldn't be too hard. They're 100km apart. Even I can't
line: They can correlate the samples with their locations later.
line: “Did you read today's updates?” Lewis asked, puling her meal from the microwave.
line: recover soon.”
line: “I'd never bet on a crewmate dying,” Lewis said. “But that doesn't mean I think he'l-”
line: Progress has been great. Arabia Terra is certainly rockier than Acidalia Planitia, but nowhere near as bad as I'd feared. I've been able to drive over most of the rocks, and around the ones that are too big.
line: s before. It's not a big deal, I just need to charge a little longer.
line: r time, so I'm going to play it safe.
line: This is the worst case scenario. I can go north or south, and they'l be about the same. It'l cost at least a day to correct. Al because I aimed wrong yesterday.
line: Then it got weirder. I turned around and looked back toward the rover and trailer. Everything was where I'd left it (very few car thieves on Mars). But the view seemed a lot clearer.
line: 2) Dust storms reduce the effectiveness of solar cels.
line: minute conversation with NASA. Now that I think of it, NASA must be shitting bricks watching this play out.
line: She checked around the rovers and bedroom for a message. She found it in the usual place (north of the campsite). Reading the Morse
line: I need to make progress and I need to regenerate oxygen. Those are my two main goals. I use 20% of my overal power to reclaim
line: But I need to know the shape of the storm, too.
line: There's one slight problem with my plan: I don't have any way to “record” the wattage from an abandoned solar cel. I can easily track and log wattage with the rover computer, but I need something I can drop off and leave behind. I can't just take readline: I needed a way to track the time of day and the wattage of the solar cel. The tricky part is logging it. And the solution is the extra EVA suit I brought along.
line: For testing, I used rover power. How wil it get power once I abandon it on the surface? Wel, it turns out it's going to be attached to a 2 square meter solar cel. That'l be plenty. And I put a smal rechargeable battery in the container to tide it over durline: It's getting toward nightfal now. Tomorrow morning, I'l leave one power logger behind, and head south.
line: Tomorrow, I'l have to reverse course and pick up the power-loggers. It may be dangerous; I'l be driving right back in to a known
line: Have you ever taken the wrong freeway entrance? You need to drive to the next exit to turn around, but you hate every inch of travel
line: Finaly, some good news! South is what I wanted. I won't lose much time.
line: There's only so much I can do.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 482
line: But I'm not one of them.
line: Accounting for air days and presuming 90km of travel per sol, I should arrive on Sol 505. Not too bad, realy. The Nearly-Mark-Kilin'
line: So, while it's kind of neat that I'm within striking range of another rover (man we realy littered this planet with them, didn't we?) it's not relevant.
line: Anyway, I don't have another airlock. I've got one on the rover and one on the trailer and that's it. They're firmly fixed in place, so it's not like I can detach one and attach it to the bedroom.
line: and Atmospheric Regulator. Then I'l use the trailer as my bedroom. Neat, eh?
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 497
line: 45km long. That makes for a 2-degree grade. No problem.
line: milennium. As it widened, dust and sand particles carried along with the attack settled in the basin below.
line: unexpected, but looked no worse than other terrain he routinely navigated.
line: brittle twig. The hoses connecting the two vehicles also snapped. The trailer plunged head-long in to the soft soil and flipped over on to its baloon-roof, shuddering to an abrupt halt.
line: "The rover's on its side," Mindy said, pointing to the screen. "The trailer's upside down. Those rectangles scattered around are solar cels."
line: "I'm not saying everything's ok," Bruce said, "but I don't think it's as bad as it looks."
line: Hmm.
line: Looking around the interior here, I don't think anything is broken. The water tanks stayed sealed. There aren't any visible leaks in the air tanks. The bedroom came unfolded and it's al over the place, but it's just canvas so it can't have gotten too hurtline: need everything to work at top form anymore. I just need the rover to work for 220 more kilometers and the life support to work for 51
line: Wel, that's not true. The tow hook is fucked beyond repair. Half of it ripped clean off. Fortunately, the trailer also has a tow hook, so I have a spare.
line: “Just three words? Nothing about his physical health? His equipment? His supplies?”
line: I had a busy day today and I got a lot done.
line: I dug up my longest cable. It's the same one I used to power the dril that destroyed Pathfinder. I cal it my “Lucky Cable.”
line: It fel on to its wheels, kicking up a large cloud of soft dust. It was a silent affair. I was far enough away that the thin atmosphere had no hope of carrying the sound to me.
line: th. Deimos is a little piece of shit that's no good to anyone.
line: rol the trailer over its nose. Basicaly to make it do a somersault to land on its wheels.
line: I'l spend tonight without the trailer to manage my life support. It may be righted, but I have no idea if the shit inside stil works. The rover stil has ample supplies for me.
line: With no regulation necessary, the air was not being pumped out to the AREC for freeze-separation. And thus it wasn't coming back in
line: But al things considered, it was good news. The critical components are working fine, and both vehicles are back on their tires.
line: If I could have anything, it would be a radio to ask NASA the safe path down the Ramp. Wel, if I could have anything, it would be for the green-skinned yet beautiful Queen of Mars to rescue me so she can learn more about this Earth thing caled “lovemakiline: I'l do it tomorrow. I'm already out of daylight again today. That's another bonus: Once I clear the ramp, I can start bee-lining toward
line: Venkat leaned forward to the speakerphone “How are the MAV modification plans coming, Bruce? Is JPL going to have that
line: “At his usual rate of 90km per sol,” Mindy said, “he should get there on Sol 504. Sol 505 if he takes his time. He always drives in the
line: Every Thanksgiving, my family used to drive from Chicago to Sandusky, an 8-hour drive. It's where Mom's sister lived. Dad would
line: The good news is I'm off the Ramp. I camped out as soon as the terrain flattened out. I've already overdone my driving time for the
line: I got 63km before I had to camp out again. But I don't even mind. Because I'm only 148km from the MAV. That means I'l get there
line: shit, the MAV is a sleek, perfectly functional machine, ready to do what it's told. And they have it pretending to be the Ares 3 Hab so my rover wil see the signal and tel me where it is.
line: The rover crested a nearby dune with the trailer in tow. It slowed for a few moments, then continued toward the ship at top speed. It
line: Climbing the ladder on the landing stage, he reached the ascent stage and entered the airlock. He sealed the door behind him.
line: Get the MAV some life support. Then I'l be able to work comfortably inside.
line: [13:36]HOUSTON: Glad to hear it. Hermes is still on track for a Sol 549 flyby. As
line: “So is it ready?” Venkat asked.
line: “Firstly, we're going to add fuel. The MAV makes its own fuel from the Martian atmosphere, but it's limited by how much Hydrogen it
line: “It buys us 300kg of payload. It's al about fuel versus payload. The MAV's launch weight is over 12,600kg. We need to get that down
line: “He won't use any controls,” Bruce said. “Major Martinez wil pilot the MAV remotely from Hermes. It's already designed for remote
line: of the five batteries and the auxiliary power system. The Orbital Maneuvering System has 3 redundant thrusters. We'l get rid of those.
line: Venkat blinked. “You're taking the front of the ship off?”
line: “You're sending him to space under a tarp.”
line: ascent, but stil. Pretty good fuel savings.”
line: “Yeah. Great.” Venkat said.
line: [09:38]MAV: So it's a ragtop. Much better.
line:  and equipment to fold it up any time I need to do an EVA.
line: and the trailer leaks some air every day. Not enough to cause problems, but it's not a perfect seal. NASA's pretty uncomfortable with it, but we don't have any other options.
line: “Wil do,” Martinez said.
line: “How are the engines?” She asked, grabbing a wal-mounted handle to stay attached to the slowly turning room.
line: Beck held a coil of metal wire in one hand and a pair of work gloves in the other. “Heya, Commander. What's up?”
line: “And the intercept has to be within 214 meters,” Beck said. “Pretty narrow margin of error.”
line: “We're done talking about this.” Lewis said sternly.
line: miss the days when I made al the decisions myself. Then I shake it off and remember I'm infinitely better with a bunch of geniuses deciding what I do than making shit up as I go along.
line: But NASA thought everything through and gave me a process. First, I disconnected the rover and trailer from each other. Then, while
line: The final step was to take the airlock's holding tank to the MAV and transfer the contents to the MAV's hydrogen tanks. I've said this
line: We're only 35 light-seconds apart, so we can talk in near-realtime. I just set up
line: [19:28]MAV: So far, so good. NASA put a lot of thought into the procedures. They
line: I'm... done?
line: “I'm ready,” Martinez said. “Johanssen threw everything she could at me. I got al scenarios to orbit.”
line: want you in Airlock 2 with the outer door open before the MAV even launches. You'l have to wait 52 minutes, but I don't want to risk any technical glitches with the airlock or your suits. Once we reach intercept, it'l be Beck's job to get Watney.”
line: “Let's hope so, Major.” Lewis said. “Dismissed.”
line: Venkat watched from the observation booth. “Why ask the Timekeeper?” he mumbled. “It's on the huge mission clock in the center
line: “Nothing,” Venkat said. “Not a damned thing.”
line: 'm just going to sit in the acceleration couch and hope for the best.
line: I've had my last Martian potato. I've slept in the rover for the last time. I've had my last EVA on the surface. I'm leaving Mars today, one way or another.
line: “Fuel Pressure green,” Johanssen's voice said from a bilion televisions. “Engine alignment perfect. Communications 5 by 5. We are
line: “Go,” said Watney from the MAV.
line: “Go,” said Vogel from beside Beck.
line: Martinez's hands.”
line: “Yes,” Vogel said. “We are the first.”
line: “Doctor Beck,” Vogel said, “The Commander has said no to this.”
line: “T-minus 10,” said Johanssen, “9...8...”
line: shoved in to his couch so hard he couldn't even grunt.
line: “Velocity 850, altitude 1843,” Johanssen said.
line: The canvas tore even further, the tattered material flapping wildly. Through the opening, Watney saw red sky stretching out infinitely
line: “Can you get him up?” Lewis asked.
line: “Back to automatic guidance,” Martinez said.
line: “Intercept velocity wil be 11 meters per second...” she began.
line: “39 minutes, 12 seconds,” Johanssen said, trying not to quaver.
line: “Johanssen,” Lewis said. “Math.”
line: “Whoa,” Annie said to Venkat. “A lot of shit just happened realy fast. Explain.”
line: “How fast is that?” Annie asked.
line: “Watney?” She repeated.
line: “The ion drive is simply not strong enough,” Vogel replied.
line: Mars from orbit. The great red planet's horizon stretched out seemingly forever as the wispy atmosphere gave it a fuzzy edge. Only 18
line: “My chest hurts. I think I broke a rib. How are you?”
line: “Hey, at least he's ok for the moment,” Martinez said.
line: “Hmm,” Lewis said. “Could you get 42 meters per second that way?”
line: “You kidding, Commander?” Martinez said. “It's a terrible idea. He'd shoot off in to space-”
line: “The Vehicular Airlock?” Johanssen said. “You want to... open it?”
line: need to point the ship directly away from where we want to go.”
line: “18 minutes, Commander.”
line: “They're going to breach the ship,” Venkat said, stil dumbfounded. “They're going to deliberately breach the ship. Oh my god...”
line: “Sounds good.” Lewis said.
line: “There's our remote trigger,” Lewis said. “Johanssen go set up the lighting panel. Vogel, get in here and make the bomb. Martinez, go
line: “Ok,” Beck said. “Why?”
line: “Copy, Commander,” Beck said. “There are latch points al over the hul. I'l move my tether along, mountain climber style.”
line: “What!?” Watney said. “How!?”
line: The ship had few flammables aboard, due to the fatal danger of fire. But food, by its very nature, contained flammable hydrocarbons.
line: on. In just a few minutes, he had made a rudimentary pipe bomb.
line: handrail on the hul, he puled himself out.
line: “Excuse me,” Vogel said. “I have to return to Airlock 2 to let Dr. Beck back in.”
line: “Roger.” He said. After a moment, he added “Ok, the adjustment's ready to execute.”
line: “Ok, Martinez,” Lewis said, “Point us the right direction.”
line: “Wow,” Martinez said. “We cut that pretty close.”
line: “15 seconds til they blow the VAL,” Venkat said. “Where have you been?”
line: Inside Vogel's bomb, the ful current of the ship's internal lighting system flowed through a thin, exposed wire. It quickly reached the
line: “Bridge seal holding,” Johanssen said. “Obviously.”
line: “Close enough!” Beck replied.
line: “Johanssen,” he said, “You got me on radar?”
line: “11 meters to target,” Johanssen said.
line: contact!”
line: “We don't have a minute,” Beck said, kicking off the wal. “We've got 11 seconds before we run out of tether.”
line: “5 seconds,” Vogel said.
line: shock of it would pul the tether free from Beck's suit clips. If he used too little the tether would run out before they matched speeds, then it would have a hard stop at the end, which would also rip it out of Beck's suit clips.
line: “Airlock 2 outer door closed,” Vogel said.
line: Teddy puled a blue folder from his briefcase and stood. “Annie wil be wanting me in the press room.”
line: the airlock by the tether. I didn't want to distract the people who were saving my life so I muted off my mic and screamed like a little girl.
line: my helmet off, he looked shocked. I thought maybe I had a major head-wound or something, but it turns out it was the smel.
line: Leaving the pizzeria, he sat on a public bench just outside.
line: “You went to Mars!” The boy said, his eyes wide with awe.
line: Copyright Info
