line: That’s my considered opinion.
line: humanity blah, blah, blah. The Ares 1 crew did their thing and came back heroes. They got the parades and fame and love of the world.
line: built one.
line: parachutes attached. Its sole purpose is to get six humans from Mars orbit to the surface without kiling any of them.
line: and go back to Earth without ever landing.
line: only six days but if the MAV took any more punishment we’d al get stranded down here.
line: just fucking die.
line: The suit did its job admirably. Seeing the drop in pressure, it constantly flooded itself with air from my nitrogen tank to equalize. Once the leak became manageable, it only had to trickle new air in slowly the relieve the air lost.
line: Every step of the way would have had beeping alarms, alerts, and warnings. But it was the high-oxygen warning that woke me.
line: I stumbled up the hil back toward the Hab. As I crested the rise, I saw something that made me very happy and something that made
line: for talking to the MAV, which would use its much more powerful systems to relay to Hermes. Thing is, that only works if the MAV is stil
line: Mars, he stayed on Mars. Leaving his body behind reduced weight for the MAV on the trip back. That meant more disposable fuel and a
line: Ok, I’ve had a good night’s sleep, and things don’t seem as hopeless as they did yesterday.
line: The MDV is on its side and there’s a breach in the hul. Looks like the storm ripped the cowling off the reserve chute (which we didn’t
line: Things indoors are great, thanks to the Hab’s sturdy design.
line: ound the medical area, I found the main bottle of vitamins. There’s enough multivitamins there to last years. So I won’t have any nutritional problems (though I’l stil starve to death when I’m out of food, no matter how many vitamins I take).
line: resources on hand, but NASA has a lot of smart people.
line: I spent most of today out at what’s left of the communication array. It’s realy a sorry sight. I may as wel yel toward Earth for al the
line: 1500 hours may sound like a lot, but I’m faced with spending at least 4 years here if I’m going to have any hope of rescue, with a
line: species of grass and ferns. They’re the most rugged and easily grown plants on earth, so NASA picked them as the test subjects.
line: better ways to grow pot. I didn’t like them. I’ve always been in it for the science, not for any New World Order bulshit.
line: think that would be an important step, but it is. There are dozens of species of bacteria living in Earth soil, and they're critical to plant growth. They'l spread out and breed like... wel, like a bacterial infection..
line: It’l be a lot of work, but I’m going to need to cover the entire floor to a depth of 10 cm. That means I’l have to transport 9.2 cubic meters of Martian soil in to the Hab. I can get maybe 1/10th of a cubic meter in through the airlock at a time, anline: I ache al over. And the shovels I have are made for taking samples, not heavy digging. My back is kiling me. I foraged in the medical
line: for 9.2 cubic meters of soil. So I’l eventualy need 368 liters of water to feed it.
line: crewmates to serve as one edge of a planter box (with the curved wals of the Hab being the rest of the perimeter). Then I sacrificed 20
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 22
line: calories per day. With my height and weight, if I’m wiling to starve a little, I need 1500 calories per day.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 25
line: 4 gets here. Actualy, a little more than that, because it’s sol 25 right now and I haven’t actualy planted anything yet.
line: another four square meters, bringing the total to 106.
line: Also, as their flowering bodies breach the surface, I can replant them deeper, then plant younger plants above them. For normal potato
line: So let’s say I could clear up that much farmland. Seems reasonable. Where do I get the water? To go from 62 to 126 square meters of
line: Then, a minor dust-storm dropped by for an hour and covered the solar colectors with crap. So I had to suit up *again* and do
line: together. Not just to eat it, but to actualy prepare it. There’s probably some logic to that, but who cares?
line: I figured that was enough being Farmer Mark for one day.
line: Today’s big accomplishment was setting up the pop-tents.
line: completely different than the airlocks on the rovers. When you think about it, there’s realy no reason to attach a pop-tent to the Hab.
line: popping whoosh as the pop-tent fired out, attached to the rover airlock. It took about two seconds.
line: Anyway. That’s a problem for tomorrow.
line: I have a fair bit of O2 reserves, but not enough to make 250 liters of water. Two high-pressure tanks at one end of the Hab are my
line: inside is nearly impossible. The whole purpose of the Hab is to keep that sort of thing from happening. The tiny amount of Martian
line: I could bundle up, but the cold would kil my crops. And each fuel cel only has a smal amount of H2 anyway. It’s just not worth sacrificing so much usefulness for so little gain. The one thing I have going for me is that energy is not a problem. I don’line: thrusters to slow descent and control our lateral motion. He’d trained for this for years, and he did his job extraordinarily wel. He
line: dead to appreciate it.
line: hydrogen? The answer is: I don’t know.
line: to O2, then the Atmospheric Regulator wil see the O2 content in the Hab is high, and pul it out of the air, storing it in the main O2 tanks.
line: Every 20 hours, I’l have 10L of CO2 thanks to the MAV fuel plant. I’l vent it in to the Hab via the highly scientific method of
line: If you asked every engineer at NASA what the worst scenario for the Hab was, they’d al answer “fire.” If you asked them what the
line: I’m going to finish off the last of “Three’s Company” tonight. Frankly, I like Mr. Furley more than the Ropers.
line: Then I pried out the reaction chamber. It took some work and I cracked the damn thing in half, but I got it out. Lucky for me I don’t
line: So there are no more excuses. It’s time to start making water.
line: I turned the valve until a trickle of Hydrazine came out. I let one drop fal in to the iridium bowl.
line: I cut up a few Hefty sized bags and taped them together to make a sort of tent. Realy it was more of a super-sized bag. I was able to
line: Then I had to invent fire.
line: Ruining the only religious icon I have leaves me vulnerable to Mars Vampires. I’l have to risk it.
line: I’m al excited now, so I'm wiling to use half my reserves. Long story short, I’l stop when the tank is half-empty, and I’l have 50L or
line: I’ve now grown accustomed to the alarms that are blaring at al times. The fire alarm has finaly stopped, now that there’s no more fire.
line: Ok, calm down. I’m sure I can get around this.
line: Important note: When I say I made 50L of water, that was an assumption. I didn’t *reclaim* 50L of water. The additional soil I’d filed
line: The Hab has two reserve O2 tanks. One on each side of the structure, for safety reasons. The Hab can decide which one to use
line: spark so it can blow the fucking Hab up!
line: Chapter 5
line: Here’s the solution:
line: One tiny flaw with that plan: It’l kil my dirt.
line: Disco. God damn it, Lewis.
line: But that leads to yet another problem. The potato plants won’t like the plan.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 40
line: Making sure to jimmy the heater to stay on, I headed back to the Hab.
line: The regulator uses a different set of vents for air sampling than it does for main air separation. The air that gets freeze-separated comes in through a single large vent on the main unit. But it samples the air from nine smal vents that pipe back to the line: Each spacesuit knew how to monitor its own internal air, of course.
line: Standing on the table with a sparker in one hand and my oxygen line in the other, I reached up and gave it a try.
line: But feeling al over my head and face revealed the true problem. My oxygen mask had been ripped off in the blast. I was breathing
line: would at least tel the truth.
line: uniform, was in reasonably good shape. Looks like I lucked out again.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 41
line: on and on I went, feeling better and better as each system proved to be in perfect working order.
line: under a second. But the pressure quickly subsided back to 1atm. This would make sense if the Atmospheric Regulator were on, but I’d cut
line: from happening. And it was working for quite a while before blowing up.
line: Every time I exhaled, I added more oxygen to the system.
line: shitty 20th century TV courtesy of Commander Lewis.
line: 0 hours, for another 10 days. Let’s hope I do a better job of it from now on.
line: everyone else to safety. Commander Lewis and the surviving crew, via long range communication from Hermes, gave eulogies to their
line: “I didn’t want to. You know that.”
line: can get Congress to fund a sixth.”
line: needs to work is the MAV. And we’d have to send a fresh one anyway.”
line: in orbit around Mars, I’m sure you can spare one or two for a couple of hours. I can give you the windows for each one when they’l be at the right angle for Ares 3 shots-“
line: Venkat stared. Then glared. “This is why you denied my imagery requests for two months?”
line: “Why not? Ares 5 won’t even launch for another five years. Plenty of time.”
line: A flicker on her screen announced another set of images were ready for dispatch. She checked the name on the work order. Venkat
line: She brought the coffee mug to her lips, then froze.
line: “You Mindy Park?” He asked, looking mildly annoyed.
line: Venkat leaned in and looked closer. Just below the Hab, beside the rovers, two white circles sat in the sand. “Hmm. Looks like Hab
line: “Ok, and?”
line: “A good wind could have done it?” Venkat said, unsure.
line: “Do you have any idea the magnitude of shitstorm this is gonna’ be?” She retorted.
line: He slid a picture across the table to Teddy.
line: Venkat looked to Teddy knowingly. After a few moments, Teddy sighed.
line: “Fuck,” Annie said, opening her laptop. “When do you want to go public?”
line: “Al right,” Teddy said. “Get on it. Take anyone you want for any department. Use as much overtime as you want. Find a way to talk
line: “That’s where Watney’s parents live,” Teddy said. “I owe them a personal explanation before it breaks on the news.”
line: “Actualy,” said Morris, “He’s got a radio, but he doesn’t have a dish.”
line: “Guys,” Venkat interrupted. “I get the idea.”
line: “How many back-up communication systems does an Ares mission have?” Venkat asked.
line: “Problem is,” Chuck said. “Commander Lewis and the rest of them took the MAV when they left.”
line: “Please take your seats,” Annie repeated.
line: back, while reporters crammed the pit.
line: “We have adjusted the orbits of three satelites to get more view time on the Ares 3 site, and hope to catch an image of him outside
line: “What can I do for you, Venk?”
line: “We don’t have time to make a custom craft. Actualy, he can’t even survive til Ares 4 gets there, but that’s a different problem.”
line: would mean giving up the mission and they’d rather risk death.”
line: Teddy swiveled his chair and looked out the window to the sky beyond. Night was edging in. “What must it be like?” He pondered.
line: conspired to kil me in weeks. And ‘70’s TV keeps me disturbingly more entertained than it should. Things are stable here on Mars.
line: Ares 4’s MAV spent 11 months getting to Mars. Using less fuel and taking a longer route, it got there around the same time as us. As
line: Lucky for me, the tech specs for everything are right here in the computer.
line: But I’l be living in it 24½ hours a day. According to the specs, the heating equipment soaks up 400W. Keeping it on would eat up
line: At the rover’s blazing 25kph top speed, it’l take me 3½ hours before I run the battery down. I’d like to charge the battery up during
line: Wel it’s a start. Tomorrow’s mission: transfer Rover 1’s battery to Rover 2.
line: For emergencies completely unrelated to this one, NASA provided 6 square meters of Hab canvas, and some realy impressive resin.
line: The resin sets almost instantly. But it gets stronger if you wait an hour. So I did. Then I suited up and headed out to the rover.
line: There’s no need to have a continuous power supply. When Battery 1 runs out, I can get out, unplug Battery 1 and plug in Battery 2.
line: You might wonder what the rest of the crew were doing. They were setting up the Hab. Remember, everything in my glorious kingdom
line: front and back. They’re there to help us load rocks on the roof. They made perfect anchor points for the straps.
line: books. Looks like she’s a big fan of Agatha Christie. Beatles, Christie… I guess Johanssen’s an anglophile or something.
line: Tonight, I’l charge up both batteries so I can be ready for a little test drive tomorrow. I estimate 3½ hours of driving, so I’l need to bring fresh CO2 filters. And, with the heater off, I’l wear three layers of clothes.
line: The rover’s always cold when you first get in it. When you haven’t disabled the heater it warms up right away. I expected it to be cold, but Jesus Christ!
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 68
line: affected by storms; it works day or night; it’s entirely internal, so you don’t need delicate solar cels al over your probe.
line: The prospect of scrubbing a mission because a solar cel got dirty was unacceptable. They needed a more reliable source of power. So
line: against the Martian terrain. It’s made to ward us off, in case we get lost on a rover EVA later on.
line: Except instead of avoiding it, I bee-lined to it and dug it up. Not exactly what she was going for.
line: I declare Sirius 2 to be a successful mission!
line: it into a square. I figure if things got realy cold, I could tape that to a bare patch in the rover, and the RTG would be winning the “heat fight.”
line: I set up the solar cels. It was hard work; last time I had Vogel’s help. They aren’t heavy, but they’re awkward. After setting up half of them, I figured out I could drag them rather than carry them and that sped things up.
line: As predicted, it took 12 hours to charge the batteries to ful. I came straight home.
line: The rover was designed to support 3 people for 2 days, plus some reserve for safety. So its O2 tanks can hold enough to last me 7
line: model.
line: Remember the MAV fuel plant? It colects CO2 from the Martian atmosphere. My smal crops aren’t nearly as needy as me, so a 10L
line: “A pleasure to be here, Cathy,” Venkat said.
line: “And then he took a little drive, didn’t he?” Cathy prompted.
line: “Why would he risk it?”
line: “With only three and a half years before Ares 4’s scheduled launch, is there enough time to make and test modifications to the MDV?”
line: “Beats the fuck out of me,” Annie said.
line: “Bob’s got more to deal with than just Mars. Mindy’s handling al the Martian satelites, and keeps them pointed at Mark.”
line: “Alive and wel,” Venkat said. “No change from my email earlier today.”
line: “Let’s hope that doesn’t happen,” Teddy said. “JPL, how are the MDV plans coming along?”
line: “What’s the biggest gap in coverage we have on Watney right now?”
line: morale.”
line: He thought for a moment. “Sorry, Mitch, I’m with Venkat on this one,” he said. “But as soon as we come up with a plan for rescue, we
line: there’s no way around the food issue. He’l start starving in a year. We have to send him supplies. Simple as that.”
line: “Sorry, Bruce,” Teddy said. “I know we’re asking a lot, but you have to find a way.”
line: Venkat sipped his coffee and frowned at his computer. A month ago it would have been unthinkable to drink coffee at 9pm. Now it
line: He was interrupted by a knock at his door. Looking up, he saw Mindy.
line: “Yes he would,” Venkat said. “Damn it. We’ve had teams run every conceivable scenario. There’s just no way he can make it to Ares
line: “Sure, sounds good. We’l see what he does tomorrow. Maybe he’l go back to the Hab.”
line: “Has this ever happened before?” Cathy asked.
line: “Do you know Mark Watney personaly?”
line: “He realy is,” Irene said. “He was chosen for the mission in part because of his personality. An Ares crew has to spend 13 months
line: “Then we’re ok for now, right?” Cathy said. “He seems to be working hard. He’s prepping the rover for a long trip and testing it. He
line: “Bruce, Hi,” said Venkat. “Thanks for clearing up some time. I wanted to talk about the presupply.”
line: “Once we land the presupply, we’l get its exact location from satelites, then broadcast that to Mark so he can go get it.”
line: happens, but…”
line: “Yeah,” Mindy said. “He did the usual 2 hour drive, EVA, 2 hour drive. He’s 156km from the Hab now.”
line: “SatCon break room,” Venkat said. “You guys stil have that map of Mars on the wal?”
line: “I’l buy you a new one,” Venkat said without looking back. Then, he drew another X. “That’s his current location. Get me a ruler.”
line: “And bring Pathfinder and Sojourner Rover back with him,” Mindy added.
line: It’s the evening of my 8th day on the road. “Sirius 4” has been a success so far.
line: Then I go outside and colect the solar cels. Why didn’t I do it the previous night? Because trying to dismantle and stack solar cels in
line: Then comes the incredibly dul part of my day. I sit around for 12 hours with nothing to do. And I’m getting sick of this rover. The
line: Speaking of sleep… G’night.
line: you can’t find any god damned landmarks.
line: Things got easier on Sol 75. I reached a valey with a rise to the west. It had flat ground for easy driving, and I just needed to folow the edge of the hils. I named it “Lewis Valey” after our fearless leader. She’d love it there, geology nerd that line: Now, on to my next task: Sitting around with nothing to do for 12 hours.
line: The weather’s been very good. No discernible wind, no storms. I think I got lucky there. There’s a good chance my rover tracks from
line: nd upside-down. But
line: And there it was! Right where it was supposed to be!
line: deflated baloons stil lurked below the surface.
line: Then things got difficult. When I tried to lift the central panel assembly, it didn’t budge.
line: Then I hoisted the central panel assembly up and carried it confidently to the rover!
line: I came up with a solution, but I’d done enough physical labor for one day, and I was almost out of daylight.
line: could draw letters on the wheels, and hold a mirror up to its camera. NASA’d figure it out and start speling things at me.
line: down again. Then I made it steeper, etc. I figured out I could pul it up a 30 degree grade. Anything more was too risky. I might lose my grip and send the Lander tumbling down the ramp.
line: But then it hit me. The ramp would colapse as I drove away, and the rocks might damage the wheels or undercarriage. I’d have to
line: Seven days since Pathfinder, and seven days closer to home.
line: I’m feeling optimistic. For the first time, I think I might get off this planet alive. With that in mind, I’m taking soil and rock samples every time I do an EVA.
line: I just watched an episode where Steve Austin fights a Russian Venus probe that landed on Earth by mistake. As an expert in
line: back.
line: Once we got out, Commander Lewis declared “what happened in Missed Orbit stays in Missed Orbit.” It may seem trite, but it
line: I’l need to endure twice that to get to Ares 4, but that’s a problem for later.
line: Suiting up, I went out to the rover and dragged the solar cels off the roof. Over the next few hours, I put them back where they
line: Speaking of cancer, it was time to get rid of the RTG.
line: The Pathfinder mission ended because the Lander had an unknown critical failure. Once they lost contact with the Lander, they had no
line: Landers can’t just shut down and wait when they have low batteries. Their electronics won’t work unless they’re at a minimum
line: I piled some leftover parts of the MDV into a makeshift table and ramp. Then I dragged the Lander up to my new outdoor workbench.
line: took me 15 minutes to put a controler on a reserve power line, then another hour to go outside and run the line to where the battery used to be.
line: I was realy hoping I’d wake up to a functional Lander, but no such luck. Its high-gain antenna is right where I last saw it. Why does
line: There’s stil hope. Any number of reasons could be delaying things. The rover heater is designed to heat air at 1 atmosphere. The thin
line: LOSS OF POWER DETECTED, TIME/DATE UNRELIABLE
line: WIND SENSOR: NONFUNCTIONAL
line: BROADCASTING STATUS
line: The ad-hoc control center was an accomplishment in itself. JPL had just 20 days to piece together antiquated computers, repair broken
line: “Oh I wil!” Venkat beamed. “But first I have to talk to my new best friend!”
line: “Just the bare bones. A hardware self check. It’s got a lot of “nonfunctional” systems, cause they were on the panels Watney
line: Happy dance, happy dance, I’m doin’ the happy dance!
line: “I can’t even speculate,” Venkat said. “After spending that long on Mars, anything could be wrong with it.”
line: the platform’s rotation, but no way to tel Watney about them. He’l have to come up with something and tel us. We’l folow his lead.”
line: “Totaly,” he replied. “But we’re staring at this black screen because it’s way more interesting than pictures from Mars.”
line: “Hab,” Venkat smiled. “More Hab now… more Hab… is that a message? That’s a message!”
line: “Al right, I see what he’s going for,” said Bruce.
line: I have limited paper to work with. These cards were intended to label batches of samples. I have about 50 cards. I can use both sides,
line: between 0 and 255 can be expressed as 2 hexadecimal digits. By giving me pairs of hex digits, they can send any character they like,
line: every hour.
line: Ares 4 landing. Modified rover for long distance travel, plan to drive to Ares 4.
line: W…O…R…K…I…N…G…O…N…I…T
line: they used to find a problem that almost kiled the original mission. Real interesting story, actualy, turns out there was a priority inversion in Sojourner’s thread management and-”
line: “Right. What we want is for our text to show up on the rover screen, and whatever Watney types to be sent back to us. That requires a
line: “Enlighten me,” said Venkat, patiently.
line: “Um,” Jack said. “You’re not cheering or dancing.”
line: “Hi, Annie. Nice to hear from you, too. How are things back in Houston?”
line: the story. It’l be on every news site in the world.”
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 98
line: That took some mental gymnastics to work out. But it was great news! If we could get that set up, we’d only be limited by transmission
line: They want me to launch ‘hexedit’ on the rover’s computer, then open the file /usr/lib/habcomm.so, scrol until the index reading on the
line: “You got your picture, quit bitching,” Venkat said, cradling the phone on his shoulder. He paid more attention to the schematics in front of him than the conversation.
line: “Yeah, I know,” Venkat said. “What can I do for you?”
line: “She’s the mission Sysop,” Jack pressed on, “This is her exact area of expertise.”
line: Earlier, I had just written letters in the sand. But this time, I needed a way to get the numbers on to something portable. My first plan was: Use a laptop!
line: “Thanks,” said Jack, taking Venkat’s place next to Tim. “Heya, Tim!”
line: “Oh,” said Venkat. “I’m a physics guy, not a computer guy.”
line: The whole world’s been rooting for you. Amazing job, getting Pathfinder. We’re
line: your question: We haven’t told the crew you’re alive yet. We wanted them to
line: watch your language. Everything you type is being broadcast live all over the
line: “Yes, it was,” Teddy agreed. “Another step closer to getting Watney back alive.”
line: Mitch paused. “Just like that?”
line: Watney added his voice to a chorus of groans.
line: “Beck!” Martinez caled out, shaking the mission’s doctor. “Rise and shine, bud!”
line: “Hand me an ‘eggs’, wil ya,” Martinez said.
line: “I am comfortable with that,” Vogel replied, taking the proffered breakfast.
line: “Should you realy go out with a storm on the way?” Beck asked.
line: “We’ve got time,” Lewis said. “Focus on the task at hand. This EVA’s al about chemical analysis. Vogel, you’re the chemist, so
line: “Seven each, perhaps?”
line: Johanssen watched her laptop while the rest watched her.
line: Leaving the Hab in pairs, they grouped up outside airlock 1. The driving wind and sand battered them, but they were able to stay on
line: Flying wreckage slammed Watney, carrying him off in to the wind.
line: “Commander,” Beck said, “Before we lost telemetry, his decompression alarm went off!”
line: Martinez fel in to the MAV airlock and forced it closed against the wind. Once it pressurized he quickly doffed his suit. Climbing the
line: “Commander,” Martinez said. “Message from Houston. We’re officialy scrubbed. The storm’s definitely gonna be too rough.”
line: “It takes a while for the-“ Beck stammered. “It takes a while to cool.”
line: “I’m searching a little more. Get moving. And Martinez, if you start to tip, launch.”
line: Beck, Johanssen, and Vogel squeezed in to the MAV airlock. Designed for two, it could be used by three in emergencies. As it
line: “What about the proximity radar?” Lewis said, “Could it detect Watney’s suit?”
line: Martinez gave him a stern look. Turning his attention back to the radar, he radioed “Negative contact on proximity radar.”
line: “You can’t abandon her!” Beck said. “You can’t.”
line: “What’s going on up there?” Lewis radioed. “You went quiet. Respond.”
line: “Or the wind died down a little,” Beck postulated. “Fuel at 45 percent.”
line: “Agreed,” Martinez radioed. “He’s gone, Ma’am. Watney’s gone.”
line: “Launch,” she said.
line: ascent software kept it trim, though it was a constant battle. The turbulence tapered off and eventualy fel to nothing as the atmosphere became thinner and thinner.
line: Four months later…
line: Exercise regimens could keep the heart and bones healthy, but none had been devised that would give them ful function from Sol 1.
line: “Complete,” Johanssen said. “Al the personal emails are dispatched to your laptops. Also there’s a telemetry update for Vogel and a
line: Johanssen gasped.
line: “Take some time to absorb this. Your science schedules are cleared for tomorrow. Send al the questions you want and we’l answer
line: “But,” Beck began, “We al left togeth-“
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 114
line: “colonized” it. So technicaly, I colonized Mars.
line: If Pathfinder craps out, I’l spel messages with rocks, which NASA wil see with satelites. They can’t reply, but at least we’d have
line: mind, NASA has fleshed out the mission details of the supply probe.
line: Dear Watney: Sorry we left you behind, but we don't like you. You're sort of a
line: -Watney
line: It’s almost time for the second harvest.
line: Most of the water wil be sucked out by the near-vacuum; what’s left wil freeze solid. Any bacteria planning to rot my taters wil die
line: in compressed formats. So your request for “Anything, oh god ANYTHING but Disco” is
line: without me. And when they inevitably blame Commander Lewis, be advised I’ll
line: Once its onboard radar detected it was 30 meters from the ground, it cut loose the parachute and inflated balloons all around
line: I’m not worried about it. Water is water. The plants use it, I use it. If need be, I can piss on the plants directly. It’l evaporate and condense on the wals. I could make something to colect it, I’m sure. Thing is, the water can’t go anywhere. Itline: Following a procedure they had practiced hundreds of times, they efficiently assembled the pieces. Special seal-strips between
line: NASA: (After 5 hours of deliberation) “No. You’l fuck it up and die.”
line: I was realy careful. I labeled every piece as I dismantled it, and laid everything out on a table. I have the schematics in the computer, so nothing was a surprise.
line: AL102 shuddered in the brutal storm. Withstanding forces and pressure far greater than its design, it rippled violently against
line: Designed for a mission of 31 sols, AL102 continued well past its planned expiration. Sol after sol went by, with the lone
line: about. Stil, it’s bit disconcerting to hear howling winds when you’re used to utter silence.
line: In other news, It’s seven sols til the harvest, and I stil haven’t prepared. For starters, I need to make a hoe. Also, I need to make an outdoor shed for the potatoes. I can’t just pile them up outside. The next major storm would cause The Great Marline: On Sol 119, the Hab breached.
line: His faceplate took the brunt of the blow, the safety glass shattering into hundreds of smal cubes. His head slammed against the inside of the helmet, knocking him senseless.
line: sized airlock, a smal breach was letting air escape.
line: Wel, ok.
line: RECORDING:
line: Stil, it’s an asset, and maybe I can use it to stop the airlock leak. And that’s my top priority right now.
line: I was originaly planning to check the solar array, doing repairs as needed after last night’s storm. So I have my toolbox with me. But
line: meters. Lazy bums.
line: pping.
line: probably realy important. And I can’t do it bit by bit, either. Once I break the seal on the patch kit, the binary components of the resin mix and I have 60 seconds before it hardens. I can’t just take a little to fix the crack.
line: Lemme check the suit… Readouts say the pressure is stable. Looks like the duct tape made a good seal.
line: pressure against the size of my broken faceplate.
line: Resin designed to seal a breach against that pressure? Check.
line: Then came the tricky part. Once I broke the seal on the patch kit, I had 60 seconds before the resin set. I scooped it off the patch kit with my fingers and quickly spread it around the rim of the faceplate. Then, I took what was left and sealed the arm hline: firm. The arm filed in, threatening to tear the new seam, but stayed in one piece.
line: meaning I just lost 285ml.
line: Ok, I’ve been thinking some more.
line: Johanssen). Lewis’s is ful of water. Actualy, by now it’s ful of slowly sublimating ice. The mangled, glued together suit I have with me is Beck’s; my original suit has a hole in it. That just leaves Martinez and Vogel.
line: It’s basicaly a phone booth on its side. I did some experiments.
line: AUDIO LOG: SOL 120
line: Al right… ok…. Once more through the plan: Use the manual valves to equalize the airlock. Get out and hurry to the Hab. Wander
line: It was hard to see; my faceplate was covered by the makeshift patch. Fortunately, my arm had a camera. NASA discovered that
line: From what I could see, the interior of the Hab is chaos. Everything’s moved. Entire tables and bunks are meters away from where they
line: Crawling in, I colapsed and panted for a moment.
line: But that can wait. I’ve been awake for over 24 hours. I’m not in any immediate danger, so I’m going to sleep.
line: It wasn’t designed for long trips, or even overnighters. But, just in case of emergency, it has refil hoses mounted on the exterior. Inside space was limited already, and NASA concluded most air-related emergencies would be outdoors.
line: I went in to the Hab again to assess damage. My priority wil be to get the structure intact and holding pressure. From there, I can work on fixing stuff that broke.
line: the soil can survive a catastrophe like that. Some of the crops were in pop-tents off the Hab. But they’re dead, too. I had them connected directly to the Hab via hoses to maintain air supply and temperature. When the Hab blew, the pop-tents depressurizline: l to survive. That means they’l last me 200 sols. Grand total: I have enough food to last til Sol 600.
line: [08:39]WATNEY: If by “detachment” you mean “shot me out like a cannon” then yeah.
line: [09:05]WATNEY: Duh. Oxygenator functioning perfectly. Water Reclaimer is
line: farm is dead. I’ve recovered as many potatoes as I could and stored them outside. I
line: Sounds of whispered exasperation filed the room. “Jesus,” someone said.
line: He looked around the room and let that sink in.
line: [08:16]WATNEY: No complaints here! You get me the food, I'll be a happy camper.
line: rainbows.
line: So Rich had to calculate many courses. He had a range of 25 days during which Iris might launch. He calculated one course for each.
line: He stopped typing.
line: “Yeah, but they'l get over it. They have 13 presupply missions coming up. They won't have time to be pissy.”
line: mean time, we're performing inspections on al systems every three days.”
line: Bruce shrugged. “If we don't have any more problems, it'l be two weeks late. But we always have problems.”
line: “Presuming an ample water supply, he might last three weeks. Shorter than a typical hunger strike but remember he'l be malnourished
line: deforms or warps. If you shorten the intervals, you invalidate the inspections.”
line: “That's 2.5%,” Venkat said, steeping in. “Normaly, that's grounds for a countdown halt. We can't take a chance like that.”
line: trouble for your department. But now isn't the time to cover our asses. We have to take risks or Mark Watney dies.”
line: “Just a little side project. Something I wanted to check up on.”
line: “Sure,” Mike said. “Go on home. Get some rest.”
line: time with research and experiments.
line: The Whiteroom was abuzz with activity as technicians sealed Iris in to the specialy-designed shipping container.
line: “About the payload,” a reporter asked, “I hear there's more than just food?”
line: much.”
line: He put his headset on and said. “This is the Flight Director. Begin Launch Status Check.”
line: from the cooling process, stil had EagleEye3 stenciled on the side.
line: “Prop 1.”
line: network; each network showed the launch pad. A glance at her computer showed foreign networks doing the same. The world was
line: “Go.”
line: “Go.”
line: Rich Purnel, entrenched in his orbital calculations, had lost track of time. He didn't notice when his coworkers migrated to the large
line: As the booster soared, Mitch had no time to watch the spectacle on the main screen. “Trim?” He caled out.
line: “Getting a little shimmy, flight.”
line: NASA had tested the effects of extreme G-forces on protein cubes, they had not done so with a simultaneous lateral vibration. Had they
line: “Shimmy's getting violent,” reported the Ascent Flight Director.
line: The brutal forces had disappeared. The protein sludge floated free in the container. Given two seconds, it would have re-expanded and
line: slightly weakened it, though would not cause failure on a normal mission. Stil, they would have swapped it out with a perfect replacement.
line: “Al hel broke loose. It's spinning on the long axis with a 17 degree precession.”
line: “We've lost readings on the probe, Flight.”
line: Other than the alarms, the room fel silent.
line: of Iris.”
line: [16:03]WATNEY: How'd the launch go?
line: that's why I'm asking you. I'd tell you you're my best friend and stuff, but it
line: unmanned probe that would be in Earth orbit less than two days. After that, it would travel to a solar orbit between Mercury and Venus. It would be China's first heliology probe to orbit the sun.
line: of the Gobi Desert.”
line: “Yes, I did,” Guo frowned. “Terrible situation. That poor man's going to starve.”
line: “No, Sir,” said Zhu Tao. “It's far too heavy. The massive heat shielding makes it the heaviest unmanned probe we've ever built. That's
line: “For the sake of argument, let's say we decided to help. What then?”
line: “Reimbursement would be pointless,” Guo Ming said. “This was an expensive project, and the State Council grumbled about it al
line: Guo Ming smiled. “They'l give us something we can't get without them.”
line: After a few seconds, he replied “Yes.”
line: Did you know Commander Lewis had a chat with us men? If anyone hit on you, we'd
line: He looked across the table to the incredulous faces.
line: Turning to the whiteboard, he began drawing a basic organizational chart . “I want two teams,” He began.
line: “Nice to meet you,” Venkat said. “What can I do for you, Rich?”
line: “That's already in progress,” Venkat said. “It's a last-ditch effort, but-”
line: “Have you told anyone else?”
line: “Ah. Thanks.”
line: chemistry crap is on the list. So now I have to do boring-ass experiments with test
line: “I'l explain everything once Teddy arrives.” Venkat said.
line: “Wait,” Mitch said, “Teddy doesn't even know?”
line: Mitch rubbed the back of his head. “Wow... 549. That's 35 sols before Watney runs out of food. That would solve everything.”
line: “Yeah...” Venkat said. “Now for the unpleasant part: Watney would have to get to the Ares-4 MAV.”
line: “How?” Mitch asked.
line: math in her head “533 days to their mission?”
line: was stil alive, now you're not teling them there's a rescue option.”
line: “Losing the crew would be a disaster,” Venkat said. “But we wouldn't lose Hermes. We can remotely operate it. So long as the reactor
line: supplies don't have to survive a 300m/s impact.”
line: “How long have we got to make a decision?” Teddy asked.
line: feel. If you don’t, you’ll regret it forever.
line: Ares 4 and 5. Most thought it was Ares 6 in the works.
line: You don't give a shit about Watney's life.”
line: After a few seconds, Venkat folowed behind, saying “I'l make sure he cools off.”
line: Between training and our trip to Mars, I spent 2 years working with you. I think
line: true. Losing the whole crew is worse. You kept that from happening.
line: clock.)
line: Attempting to open the image, his viewer reported the file was unreadable.
line: “It is a file. It is an image, but my computer can not view.”
line: “I have not heard of this maneuver.” He looked at the tables. “It is complicated... very complicated...”
line: “Ja,” Vogel nodded. “I ran the numbers. They al check out. It is briliant course. Amazing.”
line: have the opportunity to force their hand.”
line: “Sign me up!” Martinez smiled.
line: Vogel shrugged. “I plot the course and execute it,” he said. “What else?”
line: guidance. We can't shut down the computers; we need them to control the ship. I'l have to disable the Remote Override on each system...
line: leaving Mars, they were back to their old selves. She knew right then no one would change their mind.
line: “Go CAPCOM,” Brendan responded. Though they were in the same room, radio protocol was observed at al times.
line: “Flight, Telemetry,” came another voice.
line: “Negative, Flight. We're tracking them with SatCon. Observed position is consistent with the course change.”
line: Mitch sat comfortably in Teddy's office.
line: “Realy?” Mitch said. “Is that really the best use of our time? I mean, we have a near-Earth resupply to plan, not to mention figuring out how to get Watney to Schiapareli. We've got a lot on our plates.”
line: “Sure,” Mitch shrugged. “But if I wasn't wiling to take risks to save lives, I'd...” He thought for a moment. “Wel, I guess I'd be you.”
line: know you're trouble.
line: “What about the MAV?” I hear you ask (in my fevered imagination). “Won't it have some supplies? Air and water at the very least?”
line: The rover wil also need to carry al my food, water, solar cels, extra battery, my tools, some spare parts, and Pathfinder. As my sole
line: on the bit is minimal (rocks are harder than carbon composite). You can cut holes
line: That's 173 hours of work, limited to 8 EVA hours per day. That's 21 days of
line: I'l be playing with high voltage power tomorrow. Can't imagine anything going wrong with that!
line: space suit? Pain in the ass. I even had to make a workbench out of MAV landing struts, remember?
line: it works great. Plenty of daylight left. Send me a description of that hole you
line: Before any cuts, draw the shape on the trailer, and position the trailer where
line: The cots are basicaly hammocks. Lightweight string woven loosely into something that's comfortable to sleep on. Every gram counts
line: [12:07] Watney: That's what she said.
line: I folowed the same procedure for the second hole and it went much smoother. After the third hole, the dril's overheat light came on.
line: Anyway, that's al stuff for tomorrow. Tonight is about eating a full ration for dinner.
line: With today's work, I'm about ¼ of the way through the whole cut. At least, ¼ of the way through the driling. Then I'l have 759 little
line: way.
line: Anyway, I'm stil bored at night. I guess that's a good thing. Nothing's wrong with the Hab, there's a plan to save me, and the physical
line: I fucked up.
line: The worst moments in life are heralded by smal observations. The tiny lump on your side that wasn't there before. Coming home to
line: Doesn't seem like a big deal, right? I certainly didn't think so at the time.
line: [17:38] Watney: Have received no reply. Last message sent 30 minutes ago. Please
line: that was around 13:30 today.
line: I only got as far as step 1. I checked Pathfinder's connections and the negative lead was no longer attached.
line: The internal electronics for Pathfinder included a ground lead to the hul. This way it could not build up a static charge in Martian
line: extremely sensitive and irreplaceable electronics, and out the negative lead of Pathfinder's power line.
line: Wel... Mars didn't electrocute Pathfinder. So I'l amend that:
line: As I mentioned, the Big Three (Atmospheric Regulator, Oxygenator, and Water Reclaimer) are critical components. I worked around
line: The easiest one is the Water Reclaimer. I have 620L of water (I had a lot more before the Hab blew up). I only need three liters of
line: made for six. 1/6th the quantity of CO2 means 1/6th the energy to heat it.
line: “But wait!” You're thinking, “Mars's atmosphere isn't liquid. Why does the Hab's air condense?”
line: you'l start to get drowsy. At 2% it's like being drunk. At 5%, it's hard to stay conscious. 8% wil eventualy kil you. Keeping alive isn't about oxygen, it's about getting rid of CO2.
line: But I have a better way to heat it up. Something NASA wouldn't consider on their most homicidal day.
line: With heating, the regulator needs 21.5pn. Without it... (drum rol) 1pn. That's right, almost all of the power was going to heat.
line: I had to guess at the weight. The heaviest thing I'l bring with me is the water. 620kg worth. My freeze-dried potatoes wil add another
line: Every now and then, I'l need to break for a day and let the Oxygenator use al the power. How often? After a bunch of math I worked
line: anyway, I brought it back to the Hab.
line: When the Vicodin wore off, my back hurt even more than before. I'm going to need to take it easy. I can't just pop pils forever. So I'm
line: It took two hours to heat the water to 37C. Once it did, I shut off the pump, and got in. Oh man, al I can say is “Ahhhhhh.”
line: This trip's power needs wil be driven by the Oxygenator. It al comes down to how much power I can give that greedy little fucker in a
line: out of the Hab for six days. With my back better, it was time to drop them a line.
line: rover looked like the Beverly Hilbilies truck. Nothing I did worked.
line: trailer) while the other side was ful of rocks as counterweight.
line: panels, I could store 8 additional panels that way. That would give me one more panel than I'd even planned for.
line: landing. Metal was the way to go.
line: cels on the rover; another seven on the trailer, then two per shelf. They al fit.
line: Next: there's no reason for the trailer to have life support. The oxygen tanks, nitrogen tanks, CO2 filter assembly... al unnecessary. It'l be sharing air with the rover (which has its own copy of each of those) and it'l be carrying the regulator and Oxygline: With both of the trailer's airlock doors open I was able to get the first battery in. After playing real-life Tetris for a while I found a way to get the first battery out of the way enough to let the second battery in. Together, they eat up the whole froline: screws up, the whole crew wil be in deep shit. I'm more nervous about that than anything else.
line: “Yeah,” Robert smiled. “I can hardly notice the delay. I gotta say, I wish you were coming home.”
line: “Oh hey!” Robert said. “I found a great addition to our colection!”
line: “Mm,” said Teddy, rubbing his eyes.
line: would be welcome.
line: “Tel the People's Republic of China we said thanks,” Teddy added.
line: “They could have, ” she said. “But it was easier for them to bring me to Houston. A free vacation to the United States. Who am I to turn that down? ”
line: “I will, my love, ” Vogel promised.
line: dedicated.”
line: “No way,” Beck said. “Hermes is huge. It's not made for fine maneuvering control.”
line: “He's our botanist and engineer. And don't talk about him in the past tense.”
line: “Yeah. I'm concerned about what I ate last night. I think it had an eyebal in it.”
line: “Just think of the playground cred he'l have later in life,” she said. “'My dad went to Mars. What's your dad do?'”
line: “Your son wil be in kindergarten when you get back. He won't have any memories of you.”
line: via satelite from China. Dr. Kapoor, thank you for joining us.”
line: “The Taiyang Shen wil send it to Hermes. The thrusters are for fine control and docking. And JPL didn't have time to make a
line: carry its contents to the airlock.”
line: “What if the probe doesn't get to you?” He asked.
line: She chuckled quietly.
line: “Dad, I'l be al right. Tel Mom I'l be al right.”
line: “Look,” he said, leaning toward the camera. “I've always respected your privacy and independence. I never tried to pry in to your life,
line: “What happens if the probe fails, Beth,” her father asked. This time, he was uncharacteristicaly firm.
line: “Just tel Mom the supplies would last, ok?”
line: “I spent 4 years working on Taiyang Shen,” he said. “So did countless other researchers, scientists, and engineers. Everyone poured their souls in to construction while I waged a constant political battle to maintain funding.
line: feed of the probe's telemetry.
line: “Aye, Commander.”
line: “Velocity 1.8... 1.3...” Johanssen reported. “0.9... stable at 0.9m/s.”
line: “Seal is tight,” Johanssen said.
line: “Roger Jiuquan,” Lewis said.
line: She shook her head and accelerated down the hal.
line: Then I had one big hole in the trailer. I filed down the edges to keep them from being too sharp.
line: broke. They'd have to scrub the whole mission. Easier to send spares.
line: RTG. No heat wil be wasted that way.
line: Next came some testing. I put the bagged RTG at the bottom of the container and filed it with water. It holds 20L, and the RTG
line: Yeah, I know, it's a stupid thing to think about, but I have a lot of free time.
line: A Space Pirate!
line: Acidalia Planitia (Where I am) has a relatively low elevation. So does Schiapareli. But between them it goes up and down by 10km.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 385
line: I recently sacrificed one of my two pop tents to be the trailer baloon. The other is in perfect shape. Even better, it has an attachment for the rover's airlock. Before I made it a potato farm, its original purpose was a lifeboat for the rover.
line: be two adjacent hexes with wals around them and a crude ceiling.
line: Anyway, my bedroom wil take 30 square meters of the stuff. Way the hel more than I have left. Fortunately, I have an alternate supply
line: That was al I did today. Might not seem like much, but the math and design work took al day. Now it's time for dinner.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 388
line: vacuum. The three remaining laptops, al the pens, the vitamin bottles (probably not necessary but I'm not taking chances), medical supplies, etc.
line: I'm not a materials engineer; my design for the bedroom isn't elegant. It's just a 2m perimeter and a ceiling. No, it won't have right
line: I had the Hab maintain the 1/20th atmosphere, backfiling as air leaked out. Then I “puffed” the bag to get the smalest particles to float around. They were quickly drawn to where the leaks were. As I found each leak, I spot-sealed it with resin.
line: After two cups of Martian Coffee, I woke up a little. I won't be taking another one of those pils. It's not like I have to go to work in the morning.
line: After hacking away most of the remaining tent, I seal-stripped the two pop-tent floors together. Then I sealed the new canvas pieces in
line: Once I brought the bedroom to the rover, I attached it to the airlock from the inside. Then I puled the release to let it loose. I was stil wearing my EVA suit, cause I'm not an idiot.
line: Food: 1,692 potatoes. Vitamin pils.
line: with me and what's staying behind. And plot a route to Schiapareli using a grainy satelite map. And rack my brains trying to think of
line: I'm working out how to pack. It's harder than it sounds.
line: It'l be cramped, but there wil be some empty spaces. And I know just how to fil them: Taters!
line: “I hear you caught a pic of him during an EVA?”
line: “Yeah, they caled and offered to help out. Same software they use for enhancing spy satelite imagery.”
line: satelites around Mars, your sole responsibility is watching Mark Watney.”
line: time. The President even caled me a couple of times.
line: The Hab's internal volume is about 120,000L. Breathing normaly, it would take me over two days to bring the CO2 level up to 1%
line: tank to dump the CO2 it puls from the air.
line: ood boy!
line: ve time to fix things. I'd be limited by oxygen consumption rather than CO2 removal, and I have plenty of oxygen.
line: .
line: After a few minutes standing around in my EVA suit, I decided to make better use of my time. I may not be able to leave while the
line: Mindy Park as wel as a man Mitch had never seen before.
line: “We think it's a workshop,” Venkat said. “There'l be a lot of work to do on the MAV once he gets to Schiapareli. It'l be easier
line: “Don't celebrate yet, Mitch,” Venkat said. “This is Randal Carter, one of our Martian meteorologists. Randal, tel them what you told
line: Watney's rover is powered by solar panels.”
line: “No we can't,” Mindy interrupted.
line: I dedicated today to loading up the rover and trailer for the test. I want the weight to match what it'l be on the real trip. Plus if cargo is going to shift around or break things I want to know about it now.
line: The crew of Hermes gathered in The Rec.
line: “Any chance of repairing the cooling vanes?”
line: al of NASA to help when things break. We just need to stay on top of maintenance. Martinez, what's the deal with your bunkroom?”
line: “So...” Beck said, “You know about that?”
line: e nearly that good.
line: The procedure is what you'd expect. After waking up, I have a potato for breakfast. Then, I deflate the bedroom from the inside. It's
line: The next step is to gather up the solar cels I'd laid out the day before and stow them on the rover and trailer. Then I do a quick check on the trailer. I go in through its airlock and basicaly take a quick look at al the equipment. I don't even take off line: I folowed that process for four sols, and then it was time for an “Air Day”.
line: support (in case I need a backup), solar cels, rover computer, airlocks, and everything else with a moving part or electronic component. I even checked each of the motors. Eight in al, one for each wheel, four on the rover, four on the trailer. The traileline: I guess I did it as an homage to the mission Ares 3 could have been. A smal piece of the Sol 31 I never got to have.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 458
line: rocks.
line: If there is a “later in life,” I'l be happy to endure a little nostalgia in return. But for now I just want to go home.
line: “We haven't found any way to make that happen, no. His life support alone takes more energy than that.”
line: “Are we just watching a tragedy play out?” Cathy asked.
line: But Pathfinder was an easy trip compared to this, and I did it mostly with landmarks.
line: to the sun's position in the sky. The hard part for them back then was inventing a clock that would work on a boat (pendulums don't work on boats). Al the top scientific minds of the age worked on the problem.
line: The bedroom was inflated. Checking the timestamp on the image, it was from noon local time. She quickly found the status report;
line: For the last two sols, I've spent almost al my time on an incline, working my way up the back wal of Mawrth Valis. It was a gentle
line: Yes, I'l eventualy have to drive down in to Schiapareli. No way around that. I'l have to be realy careful.
line: I've traveled 1,440km. Not quite halfway there, but almost.
line: But on the off-chance I can bring them, I'm gathering them.
line: stil have a long way to go before we get home.”
line: “Want to bet $100?” Martinez said with a smile.
line: problem at al, but with my extremely rough navigation, I could easily end up at the lip of one of them and have to backtrack.
line: perimeter at al. And the way in is easy to find, even when you suck at navigating. The northwest rim has a smaler crater on it, and that's the landmark I'l be looking for. To the southwest of that little crater is a gentle slope in to Schiapareli Basin.
line: way around if I can avoid it. Originaly I wanted to go around to the south, but north is just as likely to be the best path now that I'm off-course.
line: I watched two Phobos transits yesterday and sighted Deneb last night. I worked out my location as accurately as I could, and it wasn't
line: Anyway, I got up to the rim and damn, it's a beautiful sight. From my high vantage point, I got a stunning panorama. I figured I might be able to see the far side of Marth Crater, and maybe work out if north or south was the best way around it.
line: At first, I didn't know what to make of it. But the lack of symmetry bothered me. And I've learned to be suspicious of everything.
line: around Marth Crater. Now I'm going to have to go around something a fuckload bigger.
line: She brought up the most recent satelite images. She cocked an eyebrow. He had not broken camp yet. Usualy he drove in the early
line: I think I can work this out.
line: At the very least, I need to travel faster than the storm. If I can go faster, I can maneuver around it without being enveloped. I need to find out how fast it's moving.
line: The next day, I'l go back to colect the cels and get the data. By comparing the wattage at the same time of day in those three
line: It took al day yesterday and today, but I think I'm ready to measure this storm.
line: First, I harvested the cameras from my spare EVA suit. I had to be careful; I didn't want to ruin the suit. It's my only spare. I had to get the cameras and the lines leading to their memory chips.
line: I made and tested two “power loggers”, and confirmed the images were being properly recorded.
line: Everything went as planned today. No hiccups. I can't tel if I'm driving deeper in to the storm or out of it. It's hard to tel if the ambient light is less or more than it was yesterday. The human brain works hard to abstract that out.
line: It's probably more accurate to eat it today anyway. Who knows how long it'l take me to go around this storm. And if I end up stuck in
line: As of noon yesterday, the northern-most logger showed 12.3% efficiency loss, the middle one was a 9.5% loss, and the rover
line: camp, this means I can outrun the storm as long as I keep heading south.
line: Sol 549. That's when they come for me. If I miss it, I'l spend the rest of my very short life here. And I stil have the MAV to modify
line: pretty important. But I decided against it. I'm ahead of the storm enough that I can afford one day of no movement. And I don't know if a couple more days would help. Who knows how far the storm goes south?
line: avoiding that storm. I'm catastrophicaly off course.
line: actualy get there and pul a Pathfinder on it. It would take about 4 sols.
line: find a way to leave it out.
line: To make sure this would always be an option, mission rules dictated no more than 3 people could be in a rover at once, and both
line: get to the driving controls any more) and the trailer wil be completely empty. Then I'l have a permanent bedroom. I'l even be able to use it as a workshop for whatever MAV modifications I need to do on parts that can fit through the trailer's airlock.
line: I think I can even see the rim of Schiapareli. It's way the hel off in the distance and it might just be my imagination. It's 62km away, so if I'm seeing it, I'm only just barely seeing it.
line: Ok, I admit I'm just fucking around now.
line: Some areas became hard as rock while others remained as soft as talc.
line: The rover's left front wheel sank. The sudden tilt brought the right rear wheel completely off the ground. This in turn put more weight on the left rear wheel, which slipped from it's precarious purchase into the powder as wel.
line: Chapter 24
line: "I think so," Mindy said. "Up toward the top of the photo, which is North, there are ordinary wheel tracks. Right here," she pointed to a large disturbance in the soil, "is where I think things went wrong. Judging by where that ditch is, I'd say the roverline: Mindy checked her watch. "We got it 17 minutes ago. We’l get another pic in 9 minutes when MGS4’s orbit brings it in view.”
line: It worked, too. Cause I'm not hurt.
line: I've got 20L of oxygen (enough to keep me breathing for 40 days) but without the Regulator (which is in the trailer) I'm back to
line: holding out much hope. I did come in to this with one extra solar cel. I needed 28 for my daily operations and I brought 29 (14 on the
line: Mindy read the Morse code aloud. “Roled. Fixing now.”
line: “Yeah, yeah,” Venkat said. “Just send the email.”
line: I brought al my tools along on this trip, figuring I'd need them for the MAV modifications. And along with them I brought cabling. Once
line: the dril bit before it tipped the rover.
line: I had gotten most of the way down the Ramp when I roled the rover. And the Ramp is up against the western edge of the crater. So
line: The first step was to drive the rover to near the trailer. Then came the digging.
line: Then I sat for a moment, dumbstruck that my plan actualy worked.
line: The first thing I noticed was that it was realy hot in there. It took me a few minutes to work out why.
line: trailer has a lot of puddled water that took me quite a while to sop up with my jumpsuit. I topped the tank off with some more water from a sealed container that I'd stored in the trailer earlier. Remember, I need that water to have something for the retuline: What if I run in to another powder pit? I got lucky this time. Next time I might not get off so easy. I think this was sort of a freak
line: wil give me more torque, making it less likely I lose traction.
line: She surveyed the smiling faces of the meeting room.
line: “Ominous,” Venkat said. “But ok. We'l pick it up later.”
line: “Bet your ass I'l be there.”
line: I felt that way al damn day today. 5km/h is literaly a walking pace. And I drove that speed for eight hours.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 503
line: I made 90km today. By my estimate, I'm 50km from the MAV. I should get there some time tomorrow. I'm excited about that, but
line: My message for the day was “GOT BEACON SIGNAL.” If I'd had enough rocks, I would have added “AWESOME FUCKING
line: Running to the spacecraft, he hugged Landing Strut B. After a few moments, he broke off the embrace to perform another round of
line: It's going through a self check right now, and I'm feeding it oxygen and nitrogen with hoses from the rover. This is al part of the MAV's design. It doesn't bring air along. Why would it? That's a needless weight when you'l have a Hab ful of air right nexline: getting pretty worn out, but still functional. Oxygenator and Regulator both
line: [14:05]HOUSTON: Preserve all water. Don't do any more urine dumps. Store it
line: Bruce slid the booklet across the desk to Venkat. “The problem is the intercept velocity. The MAV is designed to get to Low Mars
line: “If he electrolyzes his water what'l he drink?”
line: “Next up,” he continued, “We're ditching al life support. The tanks, pumps, heaters, air lines, CO2 absorption system, even the
line: the power and data lines that lead to them.”
line: Bruce sighed. “I know, Venkat. There's just no other way. And I'm not even to the nasty stuff yet.”
line: Bruce shrugged. “The hul's mostly there to keep the air in. Mars's atmosphere is so thin you don't need a lot of streamlining. By the
line: Also, we're getting rid of the auxiliary fuel pump. Sad to see it go, but it weighs too much for its usefulness. And we're nixing a Stage One engine.”
line: “Jesus Christ.” Venkat said. “Normaly we'd never even consider something that risky.”
line: [09:09]MAV: You're sending me into space in a convertible.
line: Al I need is a pressurized area that I can work in. I somehow convinced myself that the bedroom wasn't an option because it's a hassle
line: with NASA, I have to go back to being al “safety first.” Strangely, NASA doesn't have total faith in my kludged-together rover or my
line: “I puled a nasty trick on him,” Johanssen said. “I gave him a malfunctioning altitude readout and made engine 3 cut out too early. It's a deadly combination.”
line: “Surprise me,” Martinez said.
line: “Ja, Commander.”
line: “You mean once I get to Mark? I can grab the MAV easily at 5 meters per second. 10 meters per second is kind of like jumping on to
line: “Nah,” Beck said. “I know I'm not supposed to go untethered, but without my leash I could get way out there-”
line: First thing I did was remove the smal stuff. Then came the things I could disassemble. Like the crew seats, several of the back-up
line: Urine is mostly water. Separating hydrogen and oxygen only requires a couple of electrodes and some current. The problem is
line: Then I fired up the Atmospheric Regulator. It doesn't even recognize hydrogen, but it knows how to yank oxygen out of the air. I broke
line: [19:22]JOHANSSEN: Hello, Mark.
line: [19:26]JOHANSSEN: Funny. Don't make that kind of joke with Lewis.
line: console for like 10 seconds!
line: And Soviet ships were fucking deathtraps.
line: “Everything's al set up, Commander,” Beck said. “I linked al the tethers I could find and spooled them up in Airlock 2. My suit and
line: “I wish there was more we could do right now,” Lewis said. “But al we have left is the wait. Your work schedules are cleared. Al
line: Brendan Hutch took the headset from him and put it on. “Al stations, Flight Director is now Brendan Hutch.”
line: enough space.”
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 549
line: I face the very real possibility that I'l die today. Can't say I like it. It wouldn't be so bad if the MAV blew up. I wouldn't know what hit me.
line: monitors. In bars, they stared silently at the TV in the corner. In homes they sat breathlessly on their couches, their eyes glued to the story playing out.
line: “Remote Command.”
line: “Recovery,” she continued.
line: “About four minutes, Mark,” Lewis said into her mic. “How you doing down there?”
line: Beck floated in the airlock, tethered to a wal-mounted spool. Vogel stood beside him, his boots clamped to the floor. Both stared
line: “Vogel,” Beck said.
line: Beck scowled at Vogel, but with their reflective visors down, the effect was lost.
line: Watney lay in the acceleration couch as the MAV rumbled in anticipation of liftoff.
line: “Copy,” Martinez said.
line: wanted. His attention was briefly drawn to the fluttering canvas ahead of him. A rip had appeared and was rapidly widening.
line: “I'm getting more response now,” Martinez said.
line: “How far below?” Lewis said.
line: “I have interval pings. Working out our intercept range and velocity...”
line: “Keep it together,” Lewis said. “Work the problem. Martinez, is there any juice in the MAV?”
line: “I could get by with maybe 20 percent of what's left.”
line: “Hold on,” Johanssen said. “That'l get the intercept range to zero, but the intercept velocity wil be 42 meters per second.”
line: “They rotate the ship. They're not made for thrusting it. Hermes doesn't have quick reaction engines. Just the slow steady ion engines.”
line: “Wel fuck,” Annie said.
line: “Martinez,” Lewis continued. “Any idea how to slow down?”
line: Blissful unconsciousness became foggy awareness which transitioned into painful reality. Watney opened his eyes, then winced at the
line: “Affirmative. What's your status?”
line: “How big a problem.”
line: “Of course you do,” Lewis said. “What do you got?”
line: “Iron Man, Commander. Iron Man. ”
line: “Yeah, yeah,” Lewis said. “Fire it up. I want to know what happens if we blow the VAL.”
line: Martinez entered the scenario in to the software. “I think we'l just have the same problem as Watney, but on a larger scale. We can't
line: “Can you do 13 meters per second?”
line: “What?” Mitch said. “What!?” He yeled.
line: “Um. Again, please, Commander?” Vogel replied.
line: “Uh...” Johanssen said. She picked up her headset and quickly put it on. “Vogel, can you run wires in to it?”
line: “Are you back in yet, Vogel?” Lewis asked.
line: “You have to have someone in the airlock to do that,” Beck said. “And you can't open the inner door if the outer door is locked open.”
line: “Affirmative,” she said. “We're going to vent atmosphere to get thrust.”
line: “Oh,” Lewis said. “Wel if you won't let us then- wait... wait a minute... I'm looking at my shoulder patch and it turns out I'm the Commander. Sit tight. We're coming to get you.”
line: container, however, would contain the pressure until it reached trus destructive potential.
line: She kissed his faceplate then looked away, embarrassed. “That was stupid. Don't tel anyone I did that.”
line: “The wire must reach a high temperature. If you short power through it, that wil be sufficient.”
line: front, so the source of thrust wil be exactly opposite to our engines. Our software wasn't expecting us to have an engine there. I just need to tel it we plan to thrust toward Mark.”
line: “Copy,” came Lewis's response. “Get up against the fore wal of the airlock. It's going to be about one g for four seconds. Make sure
line: was done. She returned to her station and ran a quick test. “Increasing Bridge pressure to 1.03 atmospheres... pressure is steady we have a good seal.”
line: The three of them tightened the restraints of their chairs.
line: “Brace for acceleration,” Lewis said.
line: was not a dangerous amount of force, in fact it was less than the force of Earth's surface gravity. But it was inconsistent and jerky.
line: “Watney,” Lewis said. “It worked. Beck's on his way.”
line: “You should see what I did to the rover,” Watney radioed back.
line: “Copy,” Watney said.
line: The tattered canvas beckoned as the only handhold on the otherwise smooth ship. Beck reached, extending as best he could, and
line: “Visual on Beck!” Watney reported.
line: “We're outa' here,” Beck said, kicking off the chair toward the opening.
line: “Standby,” Vogel said. Throughout the process, he had been feeding tether out of the airlock. Now he gripped the ever-shrinking
line: They floated in to the airlock, and Vogel grabbed them. Beck and Watney both reached for handholds on the wal as Vogel worked his
line: Mitch haggardly puled off his headset and turned to face the VIP room. Through the glass, he saw various wel-suited men and women
line: Oh my god. I'm realy not on Mars anymore. I can tel because there's no gravity and there are other humans around. I'm stil adjusting.
line: Once Beck and I got to his quarters, we waited for the ship to repressurize. Hermes had enough spare air to refil the ship two more
line: s.
line: A young boy had strayed from his mother. “You're Mark Watney!”
line: Watney scowled at him. “You out of your fucking mind?”
