line: Chapter 1
line: And it’l be right, probably. Cause I’l surely die here. Just not on Sol 6 when everyone thinks I did.
line: me thing. I don’t blame you, and I’m glad you survived.
line: I could regale you with tales of how we had great fun on the trip, but I won’t. We did have fun, but I don’t feel like reliving it right now.
line: The most important piece of the advance supplies, of course, was the MAV. The “Mars Ascent Vehicle.” That was how we would get
line: with 175 km/hr winds. We al got in our suits and huddled in the middle of the Hab, just in case it lost pressure. But the Hab wasn’t the problem.
line: escaped.
line: Then, the copious blood from my wound trickled down toward the hole. As the blood reached the site of the breach, the water in it
line: CO2, the suit deliberately vented air to the Martian atmosphere, then back-filed with nitrogen. Between the breach and the bloodletting, it quickly ran out of nitrogen. Al it had left was my oxygen tank.
line: The tricky part was getting the antenna out of the way. I puled it out as fast as I could, wincing as the sudden pressure drop dizzied me and made the wound in my side scream in agony.
line: stitches and I was done. I’d be taking antibiotics for a couple of weeks, but other than that I’d be fine.
line: immediately by my bio-signs going flat. Add to that I was sent tumbling down a hil with a spear through me in the middle of a sandstorm…
line: So yeah. I’m fucked.
line: The Hab stood up to the storm without any problems. Outside, things aren’t so rosy. I can’t find the satelite dish; it probably got blown kilometers away.
line: working order for al I know. The Hab’s communications are so weak right now it probably can’t even reach a kilometer.
line:  problems with the Water
line: Ares 4 arrives (assuming they didn’t cancel the program in the wake of my “death”).
line: Wel, I’ve done three EVAs and haven’t found any hint of the communication dish.
line: accounted for a 4-hour EVA per crewmember per day. Fortunately, CO2 filters are light and smal so NASA had the luxury of sending
line: nts grow here, in various combinations of Earth or Mars soil and atmosphere.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 14
line: shit didn’t have bacteria in it anymore, but it stil had complex proteins and would serve as useful manure. Adding it to water and active bacteria would quickly get it inundated, replacing any population kiled by the Toilet Of Doom.
line: I searched through the food supplies and found al sorts of things that I can plant. Peas, for instance. Plenty of beans, too. I also found several potatoes. If *any* of them can stil germinate after their ordeal, that’l be great. With a nearly infinite line: meters. At this rate it’l take me weeks to get al the soil in. But hey, time is one thing I’ve got.
line: Turns out being on the surface of Mars for a few milion years eliminates al the water in the soil. My master’s degree in botany makes
line: only got a paltry 5 square meters covered at the moment.
line: In other news, today is Thanksgiving. My family wil be gathering in Chicago for the usual feast at my parent's house. My guess is it
line: My best bet for making calories is potatoes. They grow prolificaly and have a reasonable caloric content (770 calories per kg). I’m
line: There’s about a thousand days of food I don’t have. And I don’t have a plan for how to get it.
line: I need 1500 calories every day. I have 400 days of food to start off with. So how many calories do I need to generate per day along
line: Also, there are five unused bunks. Let’s say I put soil in on them, too. They’re 2 square meters each, giving me 10 more square meters.
line: thing at a time.
line: That’s real progress. I’d stil be in danger of starvation, but it gets me in the range of survival. I might be able to make it by nearly starving but not quite dying. I could reduce my caloric use by minimizing manual labor. I could set the temperaturline: I was sick of thinking, so instead of trying to figure out where I’l get 250L of water, I did some manual labor. I need to get a whole
line: I am one lucky son-of-a-bitch they aren’t freeze-dried or mulched. Why did NASA send 12 whole potatoes, refrigerated but not
line: and I’l make sure they get lots of water (once I figure out where to get water). There wil be no foul weather, or any parasites to hassle them, or any weeds to compete with for soil or nutrients. With al this going for them, they should yield healthy, sline: LOG ENTRY: SOL 29
line: The frustrating part is pop-tent airlocks *can* attach to other airlocks! You might have injured people in there, or not enough space
line: The Hab and the rovers use the same valve and tubing standards, so I was able to attach the pop tents directly to the Hab. That'l
line: In high school, I played a lot of Dungeons and Dragons. (You may not have guessed this Botanist / Mechanical Engineer was a bit of a
line: There isn’t a lot of water here on Mars. There’s ice at the poles, but they’re too far away. If I want water I’l have to make it from
line: But oxygen’s easier to find on Mars than you might think. The atmosphere is 98% CO2. And I happen to have a machine whose sole
line: That’s enough to make 250L of water. So I have a plan for oxygen.
line: First, we descended from Hermes, and decelerated our orbital velocity so we could start faling properly. Everything was smooth until
line: than I need!
line: there’l be some ammonia that doesn’t react with the Hydrazine, so it’l just stay ammonia. You like the smel of ammonia? Wel it’l be
line: So I ran in to a bunch of problems with my water plan.
line: pressure. It’s made to hold (you guessed it) one atmosphere. I need vessels that can hold 50 times that much. I’m sure a rover would burst.
line: Firstly, Hydrazine is some serious death. If I make any mistakes, there’l be nothing left but the “Mark Watney Memorial Crater” where
line: I hooked up the MAV fuel plant to the Hab’s power supply. Fortunately they both use the same voltage. It’s chugging away, colecting
line: Our mission was designed knowing that anything might need maintenance, so I have plenty of tools. Even in a space-suit, I was able to
line: I liberated a spare water hose from the Water Reclaimer. With some thread torn out of a uniform (Sorry, Johanssen), I attached it to
line: kit. Almost al of my
line: operational area (10 km radius). Weight limits restricted how much she could actualy bring back, so she was going to colect first, then sort out the most interesting 50kg to take home. The bags are to store and tag the samples. Some are smaler than a Ziplline: threads (to keep them wel clear of the hose opening). Now I had a little chimney. The hose was about 1cm wide. Hopefuly a good
line: Martinez is a devout catholic. I knew that. What I didn’t know was he brought along a smal wooden cross. I’m sure NASA gave him
line: constantly watching the readout of a thermocouple I’d attached to the iridium chamber.
line: It’s almost 30C in here, and humid as al hel. I just dumped a ton of heat and 50L of water in to the air.
line: Things are finaly going my way. In fact, they’re going great! I have a chance to live after al!
line: even faster now.
line: I’ve gained 70L in the water regulator and the spacesuit-now-watertank. There’s plenty of condensation on the wals and domed roof,
line: It’s obvious now, in retrospect. But it never occurred to me that some of the hydrogen just wouldn’t burn. It got past the flame, and
line: So, I’m here in Rover 2. I can stay for a day or two, tops, before the CO2 filters from the rover and my spacesuit fil up. I have that
line: and cooling it to 90 kelvin. That makes the oxygen turn to liquid, but leaves the nitrogen (condensation point: 77K) stil gaseous. Then it stores the O2.
line: I’l use an O2 tank to spray short bursts of oxygen at the hydrogen, and make a spark with a couple of wires and a battery. It’l set the
line: personal travel kit’s stil in the back. Rifling through it, I found a protein bar and a personal USB, probably ful of music to listen to on the drive.
line: upward to replace the dead ones.
line: Yeah. This al sounds like a great idea with no chance of catastrophic failure.
line: thing I hadn’t accounted for was how to bring them from the Hab to the rovers.
line:  nothing I did mattered. I had al these plans about getting in and reprogramming it. But the safety protocols turned out to be in ROMs.
line: I decided I not to wear a space suit after al. The atmospheric pressure was going to be fine. Al I needed was oxygen. So I grabbed an
line: The Hab has emergency flashlights in many locations in case of critical power failure. I tore the L.E.D. bulbs out of one and left the two frayed power wires very close together. Now when I turned it on I got a smal spark.
line: stumbled to my feet and saw the Hab in disarray.
line: the water). I breathed a bit until the dizziness faded, then took a deep breath and held it.
line: brought the Hab oxygen back up to par.
line: I’m in the rover again tonight. Even with the hydrogen gone, I’m reluctant to hang out in a Hab that has a history of exploding for no
line: Then I checked the Oxygenator. If that stops working and I can’t fix it, I’m a dead man. No problems.
line: Then I set about cleaning up the mess. And I had a lot of time to think about what had happened.
line: water. Water is a thousand times as dense as a gas. So the heat added to the pressure, and the transformation of hydrogen and oxygen in
line: airtight seal with the mask by sucking it to my face.
line: The Water Reclaimer did its job last night and puled another 50L of water out of the air. Long ago before hydrogen became the focus
line: medicine, bacteriology, nutrition analysis, explosion dynamics, or any other shit I’ve been doing lately, this is botany. I’m sure I can at least grow some plants without fucking up.
line: Glancing at his computer screen, he noted 47 unread emails urgently demanding his attention. They could wait. Today had been a sad
line: “You ok, Venk?” came a voice from the doorway.
line: “Yes,” Venkat said. “This again. What is the problem?”
line: “That’s why I want imagery,” Venkat explained. “I just need a couple of shots of the site. We could learn a lot.”
line: Teddy looked down, “You’re not the only guy who wants satelite time, you know. We have Ares 4 supply missions coming up. We
line: “Again: so?”
line: “So what do we do, then? He’s not going to decompose. He’l be there forever.”
line: Monitoring the status of satelites around Mars sounded like an exciting proposition when she took the transfer. But the satelites tended to take care of themselves. Her job turned out to be sending emails as imagery became available.
line: As she suspected, it was the Ares 3 site. She’d heard they were going to image it. Slightly ashamed of herself, she scoured the image
line: Picking up the phone again, “Helo, Security? This is Mindy Park in SatCon. I need the emergency contact number for Dr. Venkat
line: Venkat inspected the image. “Looks like the Hab’s in one piece. That’s good news. Solar array looks good. The rovers are ok, too.
line: ready in case the MAV didn’t work and the Hab breached.”
line: away?”
line: “Nearly 100%,” Venkat said.
line: carry sand. It’s not likely, but it’s possible.
line: “And the clincher is on the right of the image,” Venkat pointed. “The landing struts of the MAV. Looks like the fuel plant has been
line: “It’s a no-brainer,” Venkat said. “Let ‘em deal with that emotional trauma when they’re not flying a spaceship around.”
line: “Where do we go from here?” Teddy asked Venkat.
line: “I’l have a word with her,” Annie said.
line: bilion dolar communication network. You can’t figure out any way to talk to him?”
line: “17 times,” Chuck said.
line: “Ok,” Venkat said. “Explain to me how a single windstorm removed our ability to talk to Ares 3.”
line: “So four systems total, then,” Venkat said. “Explain how we lost al four.”
line: “Thank you al for coming on such short notice,” Annie said. “We have an important announcement to make. If you could al take your
line: “I’m getting sick of daily press conferences,” Venkat said.
line: he wasn’t, but it shows the level of commitment everyone has toward helping us.
line: “Nice speech,” Venkat said as he entered Teddy’s office.
line: “Naturaly,” Teddy said. “Astronauts are inherently insane. And realy noble. What’s the idea?”
line: “By removing safety and emergency equipment.”
line: “Nope.”
line: Chapter 7
line: It takes 18 months for the MAV to make its fuel, so it’s the first thing NASA sends along. Sending it 48 months early gives it plenty of extra time in case fuel reactions go slower than expected. But much more importantly, it means a precision soft-landline: explore far from the Hab. The good news is I have lots of time to figure it out. Almost 4 years.
line: Step one is to loot Rover 1’s battery and instal it in Rover 2. Ta-daa! I just doubled my ful-charge range.
line: Now we’re talkin’.
line: Long story short: I need to bring 28 square meters of solar cel. That’s 14 panels.
line: It’s just too big. There’s no room in the undercarriage for a second one. There’s no room on the roof, either. That’s where the solar
line: I used the resin and straps to make two 10m circumference loops. Then I put a big patch of canvas on each end. I now had poor-
line: I drove the rover around a bit to make sure the harness was secure. I found a few large-ish rocks to drive over, just to shake things up.
line: place.
line: The cels stacked wel (they were made to, for transport to Mars), and the two stacks sat nicely on the roof. They hung over the left
line: They were smal compared to the taters you'd usualy eat, but that's fine. Al I wanted was enough to support growing new plants.
line: Sirius 1 wil be tomorrow.
line: ground, which makes for abnormaly high energy efficiency. This is nothing like it would be on a long trip.
line: I’m in a bind. The damn heater wil eat half my battery power every day. I could turn it down, I guess. Be a little cold but not freezing to death. Even then I’d stil lose at least a quarter.
line: Plutonium-238 is an incredibly unstable isotope. It’s so radioactive that it wil get red hot al by itself. As you can imagine, a material that can literally fry an egg with radiation is kind of dangerous.
line: worked around. It’s the only component that causes a complete mission scrub if it’s not working.
line: The mission parameters don’t give a specific location to dump the RTG. Just “At least 4km away”. So I’l have to find it.
line: Found the RTG.
line: would definitely be able to keep me warm.
line: I cautiously removed more insulation (hammer) and checked again. After a few more cycles of this, I had enough insulation torn out that
line: That’s very good! Mind you, the land around the Hab is realy flat, as is al of Acidalia Planitia. I have no idea what my efficiency would be on the nastier land en route to Ares 4.
line: I wonder what NASA would think about me fucking with the RTG like this. They’d probably hide under their desks and cuddle their
line: CO2 isn’t a problem. I started this grand adventure with 1500 hours of CO2 filters, plus another 720 for emergency use. Al systems
line: story short: with the Hab tank, I have enough O2 to last 42 days. That’l be plenty.
line: The problem is: Where wil I put it? Sure, I exhale CO2 with every breath, but I don’t have any way to store it. I could turn off the
line: “Helo, and thank you for joining us,” Cathy said to the camera. “Today on CNN’s Mark Watney Report: Several EVAs over the past
line: “Tel us about these latest EVAs.”
line: “Do you think he’s planning to go soon? He seems to be getting ready for a trip.”
line: landing.”
line: “Think they’re going to forget that?”
line: “No, I just work in SatCon. I’m a nobody.”
line: Mitch looked over to Mindy. “Sorry.”
line: the interior without soaking battery power. It’s a good idea, realy.”
line: could ditch a lot of weight after landing at Ares 3, and have a lighter ship for the traverse to Ares 4. We’re running the numbers now.”
line: “Yes, sir,” Mindy said, with no idea how to do it.
line: “It’s a matter of morale,” Venkat said. “They can concentrate on getting home-“
line: Venkat?”
line: build a presupply in three months. JPL hasn’t even started yet.”
line: “The EagleEye 3 team wil be pissed, but ok,” said Teddy. “We can delay their mission if JPL gets the payload done in time.”
line: modifications alone are an entire project that’s being staffed up. Hopefully, the public interest will make your job easier. We
line: think the EVA was to change batteries.”
line: “Ok, maybe there’s hope,” Venkat said. “What’s he doing right now?”
line: “And then it turned out he was alive,” Cathy said.
line: “Thanks for having me,” Marcus said.
line: In the months leading up to launch, the crew was put through a grueling training schedule. They al showed signs of stress and moodiness.
line: like Mark Watney respond to a situation like this? Stranded, alone, no idea we’re trying to help?”
line: “If he’s lost hope, he won’t care about survival. His only concern wil be making it to the radio. After that, he’l probably take an easier way out than starvation. The medical supplies of an Ares mission have enough morphine to be lethal.”
line: frequencies. It’l have to be a strong signal, too.
line: “That’s what we’re thinking,” said Bruce.
line: “I see,” Venkat said. “He’s sure as hel not going to Ares 4. Unless he’s going around some natural obstacle.”
line: 31.2°N, 28.5°W. What do you see?”
line: “Good, it has latitude and longitude lines,” Venkat said. Looking at his Post-It, then sliding his finger along the map, he drew an X.
line: The line passed through the exact center of a bright yelow dot printed on the map.
line: Hanging up, he grinned at the map. “Mark, you sneaky, clever, son of a bitch!”
line: and let it boil off. But I worked hard to make that water, and the last thing I’m going to do is waste it. I’l feed it to the Water Reclaimer when I get back.
line: The terrain is very flat. The undercarriage of the rover is taler than any of the rocks around here, and the hils are gently-sloping affairs, smoothed by eons of sandstorms.
line: These thoughts pester me throughout the long boring days.
line: The Hab’s nav beacon only reaches 40km, then it’s too faint. I knew that’d be an issue when I was planning this little road trip, so I
line: a magnetic field.
line: I’m camped near it now, as a matter of fact.
line: I left Acidalia Planitia behind a long time ago. I’m wel into Ares Valis now. The desert plains are giving way to bumpier terrain, strewn with ejecta that never got buried by sand. It makes driving a chore; I have to pay more attention.
line: I wasn’t expecting to be first at anything. I was the 5th crewman out of the MDV when we landed, making me the 17th person to set
line: Victory! I found it!
line: I excitedly stumbled out and rushed to the site.
line: As anyone at JPL wil tel you, probes are delicate things. Weight is a serious concern, so they’re not made to stand up to much
line: I tied one end to a panel, and the other to the rover. The rover was made for traversing extremely rugged terrain, often at steep angles.
line: I’d worked it out in advance. On the way here, two stacks of solar panels occupied the whole roof. On the way back, they would be a
line: me? The only moving parts on the Lander are the high gain antenna (which would have to stay pointed at Earth) and the camera boom.
line: I built a ramp out of rocks and sand. Just like the ancient Egyptians did.
line: After hours of grueling labor, I finaly got the ramp made. Nothing more than a pile of rocks against the rover, but it reached the roof.
line: I’l start heading home tomorrow, with my new 100kg broken radio.
line: On second thought, thinking back to making that damn ramp… ugh.
line: conditions.
line: 24718 meters away.
line: remotely operate Hermes and bring it in for rendezvous. Then we’d get the hel out of there before Hermes caught too much drag.
line: Home sweet home!
line: I’d been gone over three weeks, and had left the Hab very humid for the sake of the crops. That much water in the air can cause any
line: With no magnetic field, Mars has no defense against harsh solar radiation. If I were exposed to it, I’d get so much cancer, the cancer
line: toilet.
line: be ok, and Sojourner can operate directly off them. We’l see if anything happens.
line: battery somewhat, but there’s nothing to tel the system to reboot. Anything that could make that decision would be electronics, which
line: shuffle across a carpet and hold more charge.
line: Bringing the heater to my “workbench,” I hooked it to Hab power. Then I rested it in the Lander where the battery used to be.
line: JPL would quickly figure out what was going on, especialy when they triangulated the signal to my landing site.
line: PATHFINDER LOG: SOL 0
line: BATTERY: FULL
line: SOLAR B: NONFUNCTIONAL
line: “Something’s coming in… yes… yes! It’s Pathfinder!”
line: await a press conference.
line: “Venkat’s got a doctorate in physics, Tim,” Bruce said, “You don’t need to explain transmission time to him.”
line: Holy fucking shit it worked!
line: “Thanks,” she said. “Have you had any contact with the Sojourner rover?”
line: talk back is trickier.”
line: Quickly leaving the press room, Venkat hurried down the hal to the makeshift Pathfinder control center. He pressed through the throng
line: A general loosening of tension coruscated through the room as the image slowly came through, one vertical stripe at a time.
line: “That’s what it says,” Venkat shrugged.
line: “Yes!” They said “Yes!”
line: Time to make an alphabet. But I can’t just use the letters A through Z. With my Question Card, that would be 27 cards around the lander.
line: Time to get to work!
line: Bio-monitor computer destroyed by puncture. Crew had reason to think me dead. Not their fault.
line: and you can send me six bytes at a time.
line: “We have an idea for communication.”
line: “You can get Pathfinder talking to Mark’s rover?”
line: 4 seconds or so with the ‘Speak&Spel.’ It’d take three years of constant broadcasting to get that patch across. So that’s no good.”
line: “It is!” Jack said excitedly. “First, we update Pathfinder with our replacement OS. Then, we tel Watney exactly how to hack the rover
line: “I prefer Star Wars.”
line: “We can only send one message per hour, and only when Acidalia Planitia is facing Earth,” Venkat said. “We’re not going to waste a
line: story since Apolo 13. Give me a fucking picture!”
line: breakfast, did some unnecessary checks on Hab equipment, and read some Poirot. Finaly the time came!
line: “LNCHhexiditONRVRCMP,OPENFILE-/usr/lib/habcomm.so-SCROLLTILIDXON
line: I gave the camera a thumb’s-up to go along with my note, which said “Ayyyyyy!”
line: “Because if he takes off his helmet, he’l die. Annie, I have to go, one of the JPL programmers is here and it’s urgent. Bye!”
line: “Earth doesn’t have to be involved,” Jack said. “Hermes is 73 milion km from Mars right now. Only 4 light-minutes away. Beth
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 98 (2)
line: picture, then transcribed them in the Hab.
line: “Jesus what a complicated process,” Venkat said.
line: “Holy crap!” Jack said.
line: they found out I was alive? Also, “Hi, mom!”
line: [12:04]JPL: We’ll get botanists in to ask detailed questions and double-check
line: “This a good time?” Mitch asked.
line: ow there’s hope. We’ve
line: Watney slept peacefuly in his bunk. He shifted slightly as some pleasant dream put a smile on his face. The previous day had been
line: Vogel slowly lumbered from his bunk, checking his watch. He wordlessly puled on his jumpsuit, smoothing out what wrinkles he could.
line: “No, not realy,” Watney said, sitting up.
line: “Vogel, your usual sausages?”
line: “Mission updates from Houston,” Lewis said. “Satelites show a storm coming, but we can do surface ops before it gets here. Vogel,
line: shoulder distinguished him from Lewis and Martinez, who donned the Stars and Stripes.
line: They split up. Greatly improved since the days of Apolo, Ares EVA suits alowed much more freedom of motion. Digging, bending
line: minutes.”
line: The Hab canvas rippled under the brutal assault as the internal supports bent and shivered with each gust. The cacophony grew louder
line: “How?” Lewis huffed.
line: “Watney, report,” Lewis repeated.
line: “I can’t see anything,” Johanssen said as the crew crowded around her.
line: “Johanssen,” Beck said, looking at his arm computer, “Watney’s bio-monitor sent something before going offline. My computer just
line: “Copy,” Beck said morosely. “Blood pressure 0, pulse rate 0, temperature normal.”
line: to pre-programmed ascent.”
line: After 20 meters, she turned around and walked the opposite direction. Walking a straight line proved to be impossible. Not only did
line: “I don’t feel good about this,” Beck said.
line: “Roger,” Martinez radioed.
line: Buckling his restraints, Vogel said “We are far past balance. We wil not rock back.”
line: “The aerodynamic caps wil have automaticaly ejected.” Vogel said. “It wil be a bumpy ascent with three holes in the side of the ship.”
line: “OMS fuel at 60 percent,” Beck said. “How much do you need to dock with Hermes?”
line: “OMS Fuel at 22 percent,” Beck said.
line: “Stil at pilot release,” he said quietly. “Ready for launch.”
line: As fuel was consumed, the ship got lighter, and the acceleration more pronounced. Rising at this exponential rate, the craft quickly
line: Abruptly, the engine stopped, and an oppressive calm replaced the previous cacophony.
line: He floated past the reactor to the Semicone-A ladder.
line: “You’re looking cheerful, Martinez,” Beck said.
line: “Henderson?” Martinez said, puzzled. “Talking directly to us without CAPCOM?”
line: “He’s alive and healthy. We found out two months ago and decided not to tel you; we even censored personal messages. I was
line: “Holy shit,” Beck laughed. “Holy shit! Commander! He’s alive!”
line: one minded. The overtime pay was spectacular and the funding was limitless.
line: NASA also sends along choice messages from the public. I’ve gotten email from rock stars, athletes, actors and actresses, and even the
line: already working on my duties for the surface ops. How cool is that?
line: with a clipboard made final inspections, independently verifying the measurements, then approved it for use.
line: Got my first email from Hermes today. NASA’s been limiting direct contact. I guess they’re afraid I’l say something like “You
line: spent with your mom. How are things on Hermes? Cramped and claustrophobic?
line: White Room for probe assembly. Over the next 5 weeks, engineers in white bodysuits assembled Presupply 309. It contained
line: every day, do you?
line: listen to what we have to say.
line: -Kapoor
line: launched third. The 251 day trip to Mars was uneventful, needing only two minor course adjustments.
line: Six people wil go through 18 liters of water per day. So it’s made to process 20. But lately, it hasn’t been keeping up. It’s doing 10,
line: So far we’ve worked out it’s not the electronics, refrigeration system, instrumentation, or temperature. I’m sure it’l turn out to be a little hole somewhere, then NASA wil have 4 hours of meetings before teling me to cover it with duct tape.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 118
line: but at the same time, obey their Commander.
line: I told NASA what I did. Our (paraphrased) conversation was:
line: midst.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 119
line: teach me the value of hard work.
line: literaly hundreds of times. Any apprehension he may have had on Sol 1 was long gone. Now it was merely a boring chore before exiting to
line: against the airlock’s back door with the force of the expulsion.
line: Regaining some of his wits, he got his bearings. Turning his head to the side, he looked through the back door’s window. The colapsed
line: I’ve been laying here for a little while, trying to figure out what happened. I should be more upset, but I took a pretty good whack to
line: have anywhere to go. So that sucks.
line: Don’t get excited. It won’t do the suit any good. The patch kit is a cone-shaped valve with super sticky resin on the wide end. It’s just too smal to deal with a hole larger than 8cm. And realy, if you have a 9cm hole, you’re going to be dead way line: As usual, I’m working with stuff that was deliberately designed not to burn. But no amount of careful design by NASA can get around
line: Al I need now is a spark.
line: On my first try, the fire lit, but the smoke just drifted randomly around. My own breathing was screwing it up. So I held my breath and
line: was plenty of oxygen in the air for me any my hair-fire to breathe. The suit quickly got things back to normal.
line: On to idea number two. Tape!
line: “hamster-feeder”. I could have shut off the suit’s heating systems and let the airlock cool to freezing. Then I’d… wel whatever.
line: Wel, no. Not my arm. The EVA suit’s arm. I’l cut right below the left elbow. Then I can cut along its length, turning it into a rectangle.
line: RECORDING:
line: Stop laughing.
line: It absolutely pissed the air out. In 60 seconds it leaked so much it pressurized the whole airlock to 1.2 atmospheres.
line: Fuck.
line: I’l need another suit. Martinez’s used to be in the rover. I hauled it al the way to the Pathfinder site and back, just in case I needed a spare. But when I returned, I put it back in the Hab.
line: AUDIO LOG: SOL 119
line: toward the Hab.
line: “al-terrain” airlock. I can’t rol over that shit.
line: Things didn’t go exactly as planned, but I’m not dead, so it’s a win.
line: That’s when the flaws in my plan started to reveal themselves. I only had one arm to work with. My left arm was pinned against my
line: Running low on time, I detached the helmet. Setting it aside, I reached past the table to get Martinez’s patch kit. I found it with the help of the arm-camera. I dropped it in the helmet and hauled ass out of there.
line: didn’t reach that far out. It should be fine once I get it some power.
line: Maintaining pressure was the problem.
line: Tomorrow, I'l fix the Hab.
line: I’m not worried about any of that. I have a much bigger problem.
line: The ration packs won’t have been affected by the explosion. And the potatoes may be dead, but they’re stil food. I was just about to
line: message. Our analysis of satellite imagery shows a complete detachment of Airlock
line: [08:52]JPL: Venkat Kapoor, in Houston. Pasadena relays my messages. I'm going to
line: and 3 for all EVAs. Also, we’ll be getting you a checklist and procedures for a
line: “First they needed a presupply way ahead of schedule,” Bruce continued. “Now they need it even more ahead of schedule.”
line: “I bet the EagleEye team was pissed about that,” Norm said.
line: week or so. We can get it to you before you starve, but it'll be tight. It'll just
line: [08:31]JPL: Good, keep us posted on any mechanical or electronic problems. By the
line: But this time, things were reversed. Iris needed an orbital path, and nobody knew when it would launch. A non-Hoffman Mars-transfer
line: All 25 of the courses take 414 days, and vary only slightly in thrust duration and angle. The fuel requirement is nearly
line: Ares-3 guys said they should run it, cause while Watney's on Mars, Ares-3 is stil in progress. The Ares-4 team points out it's their co-
line: “The attention is good,” Teddy said. “It'l help get us emergency funding from Congress. Maurice, how's the booster?”
line: “We've been at it 29 days; so we only have 19 left,” Bruce explained. “After that, the Pad needs 13 days to mount it on the booster.
line: “Sorry, but no,” Keler said. “he's already at a minimal calorie count. In fact, considering the amount of physical labor he does, he's
line: “How much can you reduce those?”
line: “And how often is the problem they reveal a would-be mission-failure?”
line: “I'm sure Watney can stretch the food to last 4 extra days, malnutrition notwithstanding,” Teddy said, looking to Dr. Keler.
line: “Rich,” Mike said, more forcefuly.
line: Rich thought for a moment. “Would now be a good time for a vacation?” He asked.
line: [08:16]JPL: A little behind schedule, but we'll get it done. In the mean time, we
line: “bonus Mars time” we've had since the Opportunity lander.
line: “Once launched, it wil stay in orbit for at least three hours. During that time, mission control wil gather exact telemetry in preparation for the trans-Mars injection burn. Once that's complete the mission wil be handed off to the Ares-3 presupply teamline: “There are risks to any launch,” Annie said, “but we don't anticipate problems. The weather at the Cape is clear with warm
line: “Wil do.”
line: “QAM1.”
line: wal's displays. In his mind he saw the numbers, the shift juggling, the outright lies and borderline crimes he'd committed to put this mission together. It would al be worthwhile if it worked.
line: “PTO.”
line: Bruce Ng sat in the JPL cafeteria along with hundreds of engineers who had given everything they had to Iris. They watched the large
line: “PTC.”
line: Thousands had gathered at Cape Canaveral; the largest crowd ever to watch an unmanned launch. They listened to the Timer
line: Clamps released; the booster rose amid a plume of smoke and fire, slowly at first, then racing ever faster. The assembled crowd
line: necessary.
line: The quick yet thorough design of Iris accounted for catastrophic landing failure. Rather than normal meal kits, most of the food was
line: to slosh.
line: The unexpected weight shift had not speled disaster. Al systems were designed for worst-case scenarios; each did their job admirably.
line: The bolt sheared. The burden was then shifted to the remaining four bolts. The forceful impact having passed, their work was
line: “Force on Iris is at 7 G's,” someone said.
line: “Workin' on it, Flight,” came the response. “There's a problem with the onboard system.”
line: “Loss of signal, Flight.”
line: “No satelite acquisition of signal.”
line: Venkat sat in his darkened office. He never decided to be in the dark. He'd just been lost in thought so long it got dark around him.
line: If I die, I need you to check on my parents. They'll want to hear about our time
line: their launch schedules wel in advance, so it amounted to the same.
line: “Tao, welcome back.”
line: Guo Ming looked expectantly back at him, but Zhu Tao neither stood to leave nor said anything further.
line: Guo Ming stood and pinched his chin. Pacing, he said “We can realy send a probe to Mars?”
line: spreads disinformation about our capabilities. This is for obvious reasons.”
line: rocket to Florida.”
line: among scientists. Space agency to space agency. I'l get a translator and cal NASA's Director. We'l work out an agreement, then present
line: US in space? The State Council would sel their own mothers for that.”
line: my God. And I had NASA telling me what to do every step of the way.
line: “Taiyang Shen wil be ready to launch in 28 days. If it launches on time, our payload wil get to Mars on Sol 624, six weeks after
line: “Yep,” Bruce said. “With ideal atmospheric drag, it'l impact at 300 meters per second.”
line: “Uh, Dr. Kapoor?” Rich said, peeking his head in to Venkat's office. “Do you have a minute?”
line: Rich looked at the mess of papers and sighed. “But I had such a cool summary...”
line: Rich snatched a paper from the desk. “Here it is!” He handed it to Venkat with a child-like smile.
line: “It's just an expression.”
line: in the middle of intense mission prep. You may have forgotten.
line: “I had to make something up,” Venkat said.
line: “Jesus,” Annie said. “None of you got laid in high school, did you?”
line: “Iris was a point-thrust craft,” Venkat said. “Hermes has a constant-thrust ion engine. It's always accelerating. Also, Hermes has a lot of velocity right now. On their current Earth-intercept course, they have to decelerate for the next month just line: rth. They'd be home 211
line: “What's wrong with the MAV?” Mitch asked.
line: “Yes,” Venkat said. “We'l have to pick one.”
line: “She's the Mission Commander,” Mitch said. “Life and death decisions are her damn job.”
line: al 5 Ares missions. It's only halfway through its designed lifespan.”
line: “Much more doable,” Venkat confirmed. “With sub-second transmission delays, we can control the probe directly from Earth rather
line: “Question,” Annie said. “What am I even here for? This seems like something for you nerds to discuss.”
line: Now that I'm in a “dire situation,” I don't have to follow social rules anymore.
line: Venkat, Mitch, Annie, Bruce, and Teddy met secretly for the second time in as many days. “Project Elrond” had taken on a dark
line: “You fucking coward,” Mitch said.
line: Especialy when we might save him without risking them at al.”
line: “I know you care about the astronauts, but he's right. You are a fucking coward. If you had bals we might be able to save Watney.”
line: I’m sure you’ve run through all the possible outcomes in your head, so you know
line: mission's chemist, he was also an accomplished astrophysicist. Though his duties as navigator were laughably easy.
line: responses were cached and would be sent to Earth with Johanssen's next uplink.
line: “Sure,” she said.
line: After a few moments she said. “This isn't a jpg. It's a plain ASCII text file. Looks like... wel I don't know what it is. Looks like a bunch of math formulae.” She gestured to the screen. “Does any of this make sense to you?”
line: “Thank you, Vogel,” Lewis said. She'd heard the explanation earlier when Vogel came to her, but Johanssen, Martinez, and Beck were
line: al of us. Whoever snuck it in to Vogel's email obviously disagreed.”
line: we mess up the supply rendezvous, we die. If we mess up the Earth gravity assist, we die.
line: “Let's do it,” Beck said.
line: “Can you disable it?” Lewis asked.
line: “Al right,” Lewis said. “Looks like we can do it. But I don't want peer pressure forcing anyone into it. We'l wait for 24 hours. During
line: net him a promotion. It was already announced he'd be back-up Flight Controler for Ares-4, and he had a good shot at the top job for
line: “What's it say?”
line: “What the hel?” Brendan stammered. “CAPCOM, ask them what the hel.”
line: “Work out how long they can stay on this course before it's irreversible. At what point wil they no longer be able to intercept Earth?”
line: “We know you did it,” Teddy said sternly. “We don't know how, but we know you sent them the maneuver.”
line: “Whomever gave them the maneuver,” Mitch said, “only passed along information. Lewis made the decision to act on it. If she let
line: And I've got a shitload of work to do before I catch that bus home.
line: But there's more to it than just travel. Once I get there, I'l need to set up camp and do a bunch of MAV modifications. NASA
line: Seems like a long time, doesn't it?
line: How wil I cut a big chunk out of a rover's hul? I'l let my lovely assistant Venkat Kapoor explain further:
line: intended for quick rock samples. The batteries only last 240 seconds. You do have
line: comfortable with you modifying one.
line: tripping al three in rapid succession.
line: down, I thought I'd fry the dril for sure.
line: You'll be taking a chunk out of the roof, just in front of the airlock in the
line: rover and towed it in to place near Pathfinder.
line: either. But they're smart; they'l work something out.
line: Getting it to bite was nasty. I pressed it against the hul and turned it on, but it wandered al over the place. So I got my trusty hammer and screwdriver. With a few taps, I made a smal chip in the carbon composite.
line: I'l have to start driling holes that I can't reach from the ground. For that I'l need something to stand on.
line: It turned out to be easy to deal with places I couldn't reach. I didn't need to modify a landing strut after al. I just had to get something to stand on. I used a geological sample container (also known as “a box”).
line: journals, and Martinez didn't bring anything.
line: [17:12] Watney: 145 holes today. 357 total.
line: quite enough to kil them. With hundreds of milions of bacteria, it only takes one survivor to stave off extinction.
line: At 12:00, I took a break. Back in the Hab, I enjoyed a nice lunch and played some chess against the computer (it kicked my ass).
line: The power light being off meant there was probably something wrong with the line. A quick glance at the airlock window showed the
line: Earth an Mars are just over 18 light-minutes apart now. Usualy, NASA responded within 25 minutes. But this time, no reply came.
line: [18:09] SYSTEM: Last message sent 00h31m ago. Last message received 26h17m ago.
line: 4. Instal rover's comm software on the other rover's computer, try from there.
line: And there's no oxygen in the air. There likely was a short after al. But with the positive lead being unaffected, the power must have come from somewhere else...
line: metal. If the dril leaned against the workbench just right, it could make a metal-to-metal connection.
line: Sigh...
line: If I can get to the Ares-4 MAV, I'l be set. But having lost contact with NASA, I have to design my own Great Martian Winnebago.
line: Al told, the Big Three need 69.2pn, most of that going to the Oxygenator and Atmospheric Regulator. (The Water Reclaimer only
line: I've had a breakthrough with the Oxygenator!
line: different temperatures. On Earth, supercooling this much air would take ridiculous amounts of energy. But (as I'm acutely aware) this isn't Earth.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 199
line: So I'l run the regulator al the time, but only run the Oxygenator on days I dedicate to using it.
line: keeping the rover a reasonable temperature.
line: the load wil be a lot heavier. I'l be towing the trailer and al the other shit.
line: But physical law is a pushy little shit, and it exacted revenge for the additional weight. I only got 57km before I was out of juice.
line: So I took a break from rover planning. Instead, I spent the day taking drugs and playing with radiation.
line: The Atmospheric Regulator doesn't run constantly. The freeze-separation speed is driven by the weather outside. So the returning frigid
line: RTG-water-heater, I put both the input and output lines in the tub.
line: I got a lot of thinking done.
line: h them to the outside hul, and that would eat in to my solar cel storage.
line: Today, it was time to experiment with the panels.
line: Oxygenator needs to be in a pressurized area while operating. I'l only need it every 5 sols, but what would I do on that sol? No, the hole has to be there.
line: I'l make L-brackets that stick out from the undercarriages, with the hooks facing up. Two brackets per side to make a shelf. I could
line: But nostalgia only lasts so long. I vowed to complete the brackets today, so I can return the panels to the farm. Then I can turn the
line: ressure vessel. The holes I driled won't let my air out.
line: I spent today removing unnecessary crap from the rover and trailer. I was pretty damn aggressive about it, too. Space inside the
line: Making them bigger makes them take less mass per kwh of storage. Yeah, it's counter-intuitive. But once NASA figured out they could
line: day after al.
line: “Loud and clear, babe,” said Commander Lewis. “The video link is solid.”
line: “Because we're docking with the Taiyang Shen in a few days. We can't spin while we dock with things.”
line: “I know, right!?”
line: Beijing Capital International Airport's Terminal 3 echoed with the cacophony common to huge air terminals. Venkat and Teddy
line: “I can do better than that, Dr. Kapoor,” Su smiled. “You are official guests of the People's Republic of China. You have been pre-
line: “How are our monkeys? ”
line: “Alex, ” Helena said, “Will you be safe? ”
line: Attaching an American probe to a Chinese booster. I believe this is the first time it's ever been done.”
line: “Why?”
line: “How about that good looking guy... Martinez?” Amy asked. “What does he do?”
line: “Good.” Venkat said. “How's the linkage between the booster and our probe?”
line: “Fair enough. So long as the probe gets to Hermes, they can burn me in fucking effigy for al I care.”
line: “We've been together since we were 15. I know when you're pissed.”
line: She took a deep breath. “We'l get past it.”
line: “It was a rush job,” Venkat said. “JPL only had 30 days to put it together. They had to be as safe and efficient as they could. It's
line: with his hands and drag it to the docking port.”
line: “Always a pleasure, Cathy.”
line: “Why would you do that to your mother?” He demanded.
line: “But then you got on a giant bomb that blasted you to Mars. And I mean that literaly.”
line: Johanssen furrowed her brow. “Just tel Mom I won't die.”
line: “There's always have a plan,” she said. “They work out everything in advance.”
line: “So how would you survive?”
line: “And hey, you guys get a seat on Ares 5. Everyone wins.”
line: “Mmm,” Zhu Tao said.
line: Vogel stood in the stil-pressurized Airlock 2, suited up save his helmet. “Ja, in position and ready,” he replied. He was the emergency
line: “Copy,” Lewis said.
line: The probe drifted gently to the docking port. Its capture boom, a long metal triangle, entered the port's funnel, scraping slightly along the edge. The port puled the boom in, aligning and orienting the probe automaticaly. After several loud clanks echoedline: “Also inside,” Vogel said.
line: “Cause I think I'd be tastiest,” he continued, flexing his arm. “Look at that. Good solid muscle there.”
line: The hard part was figuring out how to maintain life support. Everything else was just hard work. A lot of hard work.
line: through another tube just like it.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 380
line: I couldn't get al the air out of the bag. I can't alow any air in there. Instead of heat going to the water, some would get stored in the air, which could superheat and melt the bag.
line: I reattached the return air line to the regulator and things got back to normal.
line: permission to do this, and they can't until I'm aboard Ares 4 and operating the comm system. After I board Ares 4, before talking to
line: over massive elevation changes.
line: Between Acidalia and Mawrth Valis I'l get 1350km of relatively easy terrain.
line: I need a place to stay where I can stand up and take a few steps without hitting things. And no, being outside in a goddamn EVA suit
line: Hab canvas is flexible. When you fil it with pressure, it wants to become a sphere. That's not a useful shape. So the Hab and the pop-
line: canvas and flooring.
line: lopsided dome, but that shouldn't matter. As long as it holds pressure. I only need it to last another 62 sols.
line: know what it'l be, but it'l happen. The rover wil break down or I'l come down with Fatal Hemorrhoids or I'l run in to hostile Martians or some shit. When I do (if I live) I get to eat that meal pack.
line: The main thing is the water. I lost 300L to sublimation when the Hab blew up. This time, that won't happen. I drained the Water
line: I watched as the canvas gently settled on to the poles. To confirm the depress, I opened both doors of Airlock 2. I left Airlock 3 alone.
line: Ha ha ha! Of course it couldn't! Leaks galore. Time to find them.
line: Time to get a sleeping pil from the medical supplies.
line: the canvas had to go. Why hack off most of the canvas only to replace it with more canvas? Seams.
line: I roled up the whole thing (wadded up, realy) and took it out to the rover.
line: It's a little scary. The first time I test the thing overnight wil be with me in it. But that'l be later. I've done enough today.
line: Heat: 1400W RTG. Homemade reservoir to heat regulator's return air. Electric heater in rover as a backup.
line: To hel with those guys. I'm a Space Pirate!
line: know. Plan for the worst.
line: And a plastic box to to serve as a toilet. One with a good lid.
line: Venkat peered at the blurry image. “Is this as good as it gets?”
line: Venkat shrugged. “He's busy. He works most of the daylight hours, and arranging rocks to spel a message takes time and energy.”
line: “Why is this suddenly so important?”
line: Atmospheric Regulator and Oxygenator out of the Hab, you're left with... a tent. A big round tent that can't support life.
line: Then I got the AREC. It sat outside the Hab like an AC unit might on Earth. In a way, that's what it was. I hauled it over to the trailer and lashed it to the shelf I'd made for it. Then I hooked it up to the feed lines that led through the “baloon” tline: noting that I can't monitor the actual support equipment from the rover (it's al in the trailer), but the rover can tel me al about the air.
line: But I did wake up, and the main computer showed the slight rise in CO2 I had predicted. Looks like I live another Sol.
line: I dragged the popped bedroom in to the Hab and gave it a good going-over. It failed at the seam where the wal met the ceiling. Makes
line: know why. Don't care. The important thing is I don't have to suffer.
line: After that comes Arabia Terra. Each crater represents two brutal elevation changes. First down, then up. I did my best to find the
line: “Room?” Teddy asked.
line: “It's the external component of the Atmospheric Regulator,” Mindy said. “It sits outside the Hab, so I know when it disappeared. He
line: whip them up in to thick clouds. There are five or six of them every year. The thing is, they last for months, they cover huge sections of the planet, and they make the atmosphere thick with dust.”
line: “It's a flyby,” Venkat said. “Hermes isn't going in to Martian orbit. If they did, they wouldn't be able to get back. They need their
line: Before I risk my life with this contraption, I need to test it.
line: power. I'l be sleeping in the Hab, but I left the rover's life support on. It'l maintain the air overnight, and tomorrow I'l see how much power it ate up. I've watched the power consumption while it's attached to the Hab and there weren't any surprises. Bline: “How can that happen?” Lewis asked. “They're outside the craft. There's nothing for them to react with.”
line: be replaced each mission. I found a way to clean them with a chemical bath I made in the lab, but it eats away at the filters themselves.
line: “I can't think of anywhere else to sleep,” he said. “The ship is pretty cramped, and if I sleep in a halway I'l be in people's way.”
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 444
line: It's a low-tech solution, but it worked. There's plenty of heat, thanks to the RTG. I just needed to get it evenly spread out. For once, entropy was on my side.
line: al egress to Mars.
line:  time the Hab launched me like a cannonbal. I'm not eager to repeat it.
line: Today's the big day. I'm leaving for Schiapareli.
line: Schiapareli.
line: I'm in the rover right now. (That should be obvious, with the Hab main computer offline forever.) I've got 2 ful batteries, al systems are go and I've got 45 sols of driving ahead of me.
line: But now I look forward to them. They're my days off.
line: But now I'm definitely in a canyon. And the bottom is nice and flat. Exactly what I was hoping for. It's amazing; this valey wasn't made by a river slowly carving it away. It was made by a mega-flood in a single day. It would have been a hel of a thing toline: “And can Watney's only source of energy is his solar panels, correct?”
line: very day wil be slightly darker than the last. Too subtle to notice.”
line: I'm about half-way through Mawrth Valis now. Just as I'd hoped, the going has been easy. No major elevation changes. Hardly any
line: So I go out every night with a home-made sextant and sight Deneb. It's kind of sily if you think about it. I'm in my space suit on Mars
line: 's travel. It's kind of a successive approximation thing. So far, it's been working.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 466
line: complete stop at intersections. Wel, not realy, but it's bad to get off-course here.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 468
line: At least that jury-rigging wil be NASA's job to work out, not mine. Once I get to the MAV, I'l be back in contact with them and they
line: entered the dust storm yesterday.”
line: “I know,” he said. “I'm not talking about faith in God, I'm talking about faith in Mark Watney. Look at al the shit Mars has thrown at
line: My fifth Air Day, and things are going wel. I should be skimming south of Marth Crater tomorrow. It'l get easier after that.
line: At least, that was the original plan. I'l be taking their MAV and Commander Lewis hasn't given Hermes back, so we've ruined
line: It was bound to happen eventualy. I navigated badly and ended up at the ridge of Marth Crater. With it being 100km wide, I can't see
line: they stil just aren't 100%.
line: peak of the rim. That's the sort of walk people do on Earth without thinking twice, but in an EVA suit it's an ordeal.
line: Yesterday, I passed a crater. It's about 50km west of here. It's just visible on the horizon. But looking east, I can't see anywhere near that far. Marth Crater is 110km wide. With a visibility of 50km, I should at least be able to see a distinct curvaturline: 1) I've been in a dust storm for several sols.
line: Mindy trudged to her computer. Today's shift began at 2:10pm. Her schedule matched Watney's every day. She slept when he slept.
line: Fumbling with her cel phone, she dialed Venkat's personal number.
line: The more power I generate, the more I'l have for movement. With clear skies, I dedicate 80% of my total power toward movement. I
line: So here's my plan:
line: behind with a single solar cel.
line: My electronics kit has several power meters. So I figure: why make my own logging system? I can just film the power meter al day
line: So I needed a heat source. And my electronics kit provided the answer. Resistors. Lots and lots of them. The camera and power meter
line: were to stay here another 16 sols, it would get dark enough to kil me.
line: little home in Western Australia. Because Western Australia is on the opposite side of Earth from Idaho.
line: Along the way, I picked up the power-logger I'd left behind at the half-way point. Just now I brought in the one I'd left here yesterday.
line: I think I'm getting ahead of the storm.
line: If there were no storm, I'd be going directly southwest toward my goal. As it is, going only south, I'm not nearly as fast. I'm traveling 90km per day as usual, but I only get 37km closer to Schiapareli because Pythagoras is a dick. I don't know when I'l line: As for speculation, I speculated on when the hel I'l get past this fucking storm.
line: I am FINALLY past the god damned storm. Today's power regen was 100%. No more dust in the air. With the storm moving
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 487
line: I need to put some thought in to the bedroom.
line: Unfortunately, as an emergency device, it was never intended to be reusable. The idea was people seal themselves in the pop tent, then
line:  ones, actualy). NASA wanted to make sure the emergency shelter alows the crew on the outside to get air in to the crew on the inside.
line: Today's an Air Day and for once, I don't want it. I'm so close to Schiapareli, I can taste it. I guess it would taste like sand, mostly, but that's not the point.
line: Tomorrow night, I'l be at rock bottom!
line: countless tiny particles and their ability to maintain an angled shape. Entrance Ramp had been born.
line: But it wasn't enough.
line: The rover had come to rest on its side. The valves leading to the now missing hoses had detected the sudden pressure drop and closed.
line: "Any signs of Watney doing something after the accident? An EVA maybe?"
line: "Watney may stil be hurt inside," Mitch said. "He could have banged his head or broken an arm or something."
line: the computer to type this. Because it's stil mounted near the control panel, and the rover is on its side.
line: So I roled. That's not the end of the world. I'm alive and the rover's fine. I'm more worried about the solar cels I probably roled over.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 498 (2)
line: While I was out, I colected the 26 solar cels that aren't under the rover and set them up to recharge my batteries. May as wel, right?
line: “Oh no,” Mindy said. “I might lose my job as an interplanetary voyeur? I guess I'd have to use my Master's degree for something else.”
line: better.
line: Then I went back to the rover and tied off the cord to the roof-rack bar on the high side. Now I had a long, taut line running
line: JPL guys a beer.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 500
line: So I dug a hole. A hole one by three meters, and one meter deep. It took me four miserable hours of hard labor, but I got it done.
line: I started the day with some Nothin' Tea. Nothin' Tea is easy to make. First, get some hot water, then add nothin'. I experimented with
line: tering 41C.
line: The one remaining thing to fix was the tow hook. It was absolutely ruined. It took the ful force of the crash. As I suspected, the trailer's tow hook was unscathed. So I transferred it to the rover and reconnected the two vehicles for travel.
line: Anyway, to ensure I don't crash again, I'l-- Seriously... no women in like, years. I don't ask for much. And believe me, a Botanist /
line: More motivation to stay alive.
line: “Good, good,” Venkat said. “Any surprises I should know about?”
line: “Mitch, who's handling Ares 4 MAV communication?”
line: mirrors before each outing, you name it.
line: I decided it was time for a very special occasion. I ate the meal pack labeled “Survived Something That Should Have Kiled Me.” Oh
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 504
line: directed and are designed for line-of-sight communication. It's strange to think that a sand dune wil stop me from hearing what the MAV
line: He stumbled excitedly out of the airlock, faling to the ground then scrambling to his feet. Beholding the MAV, he gestured to it with
line: I finaly made it! I'm at the MAV!
line: [13:07]HOUSTON: Congratulations from all of us here at Mission Control! Well
line: you do with urine?
line: “Bear in mind,” Bruce said, producing a booklet from his briefcase, “This is the end result of thousands of hours of work, testing, and
line: “For every kilogram of hydrogen, it can make 13 kilograms of fuel. Watney has 550 liters of water. We'l have him electrolyze it to get
line: Bruce puled another copy of the booklet from his briefcase. “There were some gimmies right off the bat. The design presumes 500kg
line: “Martinez is the best trained pilot,” Bruce said. “If there is an emergency, he's the guy you want controling the ship.”
line: “No point,” Bruce said. “If the comm system goes out during ascent, the time it takes to reacquire wil be too long to do any good. The
line: “So he's going to launch with a big hole in the front of the ship?”
line: “Yeah. Can I go on?”
line: “Yeah.”
line: to be done. The procedure doc we sent has instructions for each of these steps with
line: an EVA suit. I devised a briliant plan whereby the current bedroom would become the new home of the Regulator and Oxygenator, and
line: The lunatics at NASA have me doing al kinds of rape to the MAV, but I don't have to open the hul til the end. So the first thing I'l do
line: Pity I'm going to tear it apart.
line: “It's mission-critical now,” Lewis said. “So get it right.”
line: “Good idea,” Lewis said. “And how's our course?”
line: safely. Any more and
line: milimeters per second may not seem like much, but in 40 minutes it can move us up to 5.7 kilometers.”
line: There aren't many people who can say they've vandalized a three bilion dolar spacecraft. But I'm one of them.
line: I learned about Sanford and Son from Lewis's colection. Seriously, that woman needs to see someone about her 70's problem.
line: immediately and I'd be hanging around in an piss-based atmosphere.
line: I'l need to go through this process several more times as the launch date approaches. I could have done this al at once, but NASA
line: [19:25]JOHANSSEN: The psych team was worried about personality conflicts.
line: [19:29]JOHANSSEN: When we pick you up, I will make wild, passionate love to you.
line: It might not launch at al. I did remove an engine, after al. I could have fucked up al sorts of things during that process. And there's no way to test the ascent stage. Once you light it, it's lit.
line: “Vogel,” Lewis said, “How's our course.”
line: “Just as wel you're our doctor,” Lewis said. “Vogel, if al goes according to plan, you're puling Beck and Watney back aboard with
line: “Time until MAV launch?”
line: triple checks everything.”
line: whole launch is 12 minutes long. They're on their own.”
line: meters from here. Maybe some day they'l send a probe to colect them. May as wel make them easy to pick up.
line: They gathered.
line: “Go,” Johanssen responded.
line: latency between Hermes and Earth made any such need highly unlikely.
line: “Did you get that, Timekeeper?” Mitch said.
line: “Four more minutes,” Martinez said, cracking his knuckles. “You ready for some flying, Beth?”
line: “Oh yeah. Even Watney can't say that.”
line: “I wil not do this, Doctor Beck.”
line: “About 5 seconds, Watney,” Lewis said to her headset. “Hang on.”
line: Directly in his field of view, the Hab canvas patch flapped violently as the ship exponentialy gained speed. Concentration became
line: “I'm teling you it's sluggish,” Martinez insisted.
line: sky shifted from red to black.
line: “Copy. Main engine cut-off in 15 seconds.”
line: “Watney, you there?” Lewis said. “Watney? Watney, do you read?”
line: her hands.
line: “Not enough,” Lewis said. “Martinez, what if we point our attitude thrusters al the same direction?”
line: “Use 75.5 percent of remaining attitude adjust fuel,” Johanssen said. “That'l bring the intercept range to zero.”
line: “The launch missed badly,” Venkat said, looking past Mitch to the screens beyond. “The intercept distance was going to be way too
line: “They used al the fuel they could to close the gap in time. They don't have enough to slow down.” Venkat frowned.
line: “It should have a bio-monitor,” Beck said. “And it'l be broadcasting. It's not a strong signal; it's only designed to go a couple hundred meters to the rover or Hab. But maybe we can pick it up.”
line: “That's not bad,” Beck said. “Lower than I'd like but he's been in Mars gravity for 18 months, so it's expected.”
line: Reaching toward the controls on his arm, he winced. Trying again, more slowly this time, he activated his radio. “MAV to Hermes.”
line: “That's consistent with what we saw during the launch.”
line: need another 42 to match Hermes when I came back.”
line: barely control.”
line: German to English. “It's up. What do you need?”
line: “Also, al the air would leave,” Johanssen felt compeled to add.
line: “We'd have a relative velocity of 13 meters per second afterward,” Johanssen supplied.
line: “Watney,” she said to her headset, “We have a plan.”
line: blows-”
line: e acceleration we need.”
line: “Commander,” Martinez said, pausing at the exit, “You want me to bring back some space suits?”
line: “Makes sense.” Beck responded as he floated back in to the ship.
line: “He's taking his suit off right now and can't reply,” Beck reported, “but he heard the order.”
line: “That's too risky and you know it,” she replied.
line: maximizing surface area. In a pure oxygen environment, 16.7 milion Joules wil be released for every kilogram of sugar used, releasing the explosive force of 8 sticks of dynamite. Such is the nature of combustion in pure oxygen.
line: Johanssen worked on the lighting panel as Beck floated toward the airlock.
line: He showed up just a minute later, carefuly floating down the hal with the bomb held in both hands.
line: Everything's ready for acceleration and the compartment's sealed off.”
line: “Bout time,” Beck said, climbing in.
line: bomb's ready, and the breaker's jammed closed,” she said. “I can set it off by remotely turning on Lighting Panel 41.”
line: “Martinez, how's our angle?”
line: “If it's any consolation,” Teddy said, “Pretty much everyone in the world feels the same way.”
line: explosion ripped the airlock door to shreds.
line: VAL.”
line: Placing his feet on the back wal, Beck coiled and leaped out of the airlock.
line: “Copy. 5.2 meters per second.”
line: “Aaaaand, counter-thrusting.” Beck said, firing the MMU thrusters again. The MAV loomed before him. “Velocity?” He asked.
line: “Copy,” Beck said.
line: “8 seconds, Dr. Beck,” Vogel radioed.
line: The two accelerated toward Hermes for a few seconds. Then the MMU controls on Beck's heads-up display turned red.
line: “Reel 'em in, Vogel,” Lewis said.
line: Lewis's voice echoed across the world: “Houston, this is Hermes Actual. Six crew safely aboard.”
line: LOG ENTRY: MISSION DAY 687
line: have to cycle the airlock.
line: Then came the (painful) high-fives, folowed by people staying as far away from my stench as possible. We had a few minutes of
line: knowledge as he could.
line: “Sweetie!” The mom scolded. “That's rude.”
line: Al fonts in this document are public domain.
