line: Six days in to what should be a greatest two months of my life, and it’s turned in to a nightmare.
line: Ares 3. Wel. That was my mission. Wel, not mine per se. Commander Lewis was in charge. I was just one of her crew. Actualy, I
line: everything was a go, we set out for Mars. But not very fast. Gone are the days of heavy chemical fuel burns and trans-Mars injection
line: A total of 14 unmanned missions deposited everything we would need for surface operations. They tried their best to land al the supply
line: hydrogen you bring to Mars, you can make 13 kilograms of fuel. It’s a slow process, though. It takes 24 months to fil the tank. That’s why they sent it long before we got here.
line: Everyone made it but me.
line: The antenna had enough force to punch through the suit and my side, but then it got stopped by my pelvis. So there was only one hole
line: amount of oxygen you bring with you, but the amount of CO2 you can remove. In the Hab, we had the Oxygenator, a large piece of
line: knew what to do.
line: Right that moment I knew I was screwed. But I didn’t want to just die out on the surface. I limped back to the Hab and fumbled my
line: I had no way to talk to Hermes. In time, I could locate the dish out on the surface, but it would take weeks for me to rig up any repairs, and that would be too late. In an abort, Hermes would leave orbit within 24 hours. The orbital dynamics made the triline: So that’s the situation. I’m stranded on Mars. I have no way to communicate with Hermes or Earth. Everyone thinks I’m dead. I’m in a
line: The surface mission was supposed to be 31 days. For redundancy, the supply probes had enough food to last the whole crew 56 days.
line: Not that the MDV would be much use to me. Its thrusters can’t even lift its own weight. But it might have been valuable for parts. Might stil be.
line: re the oxygen. It just
line: tel you that. If I get to that point, I’l take an easier way out.
line: when it returns in 4 years with the Ares 4 crew.
line: I could throw together a rudimentary dish out of metal I find around the base, but this isn’t some walkie-talkie I’m working with here.
line: In other news, I’m starting to come up with an idea for food. My botany background may come in useful after al.
line: But I’m a botanist, damn it. I should be able to find a way to make this happen. If I don’t, I’l be a realy hungry botanist in about a
line: Of course now I’m doing exactly that. I’m saving every scrap of biomatter I can find. Every time I finish a meal, the leftovers go to the compost bucket. As for other biological material…
line: “infect” the new Martian soil. After another week, I’l double it again. And so on. Of course, al the while, I’l be adding al new manure to the effort.
line: Hel yeah I’m a botanist! Fear my botany powers!
line: Anyway, it’s nice to see progress. Time to start getting the bacteria to work on these minerals. After lunch. No 3/4 ration today. I’ve
line: Just send enough for an emergency.” Humans need 3 liters of water per day to be comfortable. They gave us 50 liters each. There are 300
line: 5 square meters was about right for the amount of manure I had handy. I dumped my big container o’ shit on to the soil and nearly
line: I got al the sand in and ready to go. 2/3 of the base is now dirt. And today I executed my first dirt-doubling. It's been a week, and the former Martian soil was rich and lovely. Two more doublings and I wil have covered the whole field.
line: So I can’t just live off the land for ever. But I can extend my life. The potatoes wil last me 76 days.
line: different rate and you need to figure out when it’l be empty? Wel, that concept is critical to the “Mark Watney doesn’t die” project I’m working on.
line: times my current plan’s production to survive.
line: periods traversing the surface. They’re too cramped to plant crops in, and I want to be able to drive them around anyway. But both rovers have an emergency pop-tent.
line: Also, this sort of farming annihilates the soil. Any farmer doing it would turn their land into a dust bowl within 12 years. It’s not
line: The 50L I have is for me to drink if the Water Reclaimer breaks. So I’m 250L short of my 250L goal.
line: once the job was done, I came back to my Little Hab on the Prairie.
line: few hours to harden a bit, then planted them, wel spaced apart, in the corner. God speed, little taters. My life depends on you.
line: I rifled through Commander Lewis’s stuff until I found her personal data-stick. Everyone got to bring whatever digital entertainment
line: The idea was you’d throw out a pop-tent, get in, and wait for rescue. The airlock is nothing more than valves and two doors. Equalize
line: alive. But, you know, other than that edge case there’s no reason.
line: loss automaticaly
line: something and took it out of context.
line: s.
line: That’s where the MAV fuel plant comes in.
line: So I’l have to go a different route.
line: Thanks, Martinez! You may have saved my life!
line: occasionaly blew themselves up with it).
line: Anyway, much more important: I simply can’t abide the replacement of Chrissie with Cindy. “Three’s Company” may never be the
line: But I can’t create it very quickly. At 1/2L of CO2 per hour, it wil take 25 days to make the oxygen I need. That’s longer than I’d like.
line: The Oxygenator wil turn it in to oxygen in its own time.
line: But if I can pul it off, I’l be making water continuously, with no need to store hydrogen or oxygen. It’l be mixed in to the atmosphere
line: This may be my last entry.
line: I brought al the Hydrazine and reaction chamber in. I briefly considered only having one tank in at a time to reduce risk. But some
line: Here goes nothin’
line: But hey, that’s what I wanted. I just freed up hydrogen and nitrogen. Yay!
line: iridium bowl. Thankfuly, the bags are clear, so I can stil see what’s going on.
line: uniforms are synthetic. I needed something that could hold a flame, some kind of pilot light. I don't have the skils to keep enough H2
line: colected ribbons of bark from local palm trees, then got a couple of sticks and rubbed them together to create enough friction to…
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 34
line: For a moment, there yet another alarm. The Water Reclaimer’s main tank was ful. Booyah! That’s the kind of problem I want to have!
line: fled in terror, that’s why! And I’m not sure what the hel to do next.
line: worried, and I wasn’t surprised when the reclaimer didn’t get anywhere near 50L.
line: That’s not a problem, it’s just doing its job. But it does mean I’ve been gaining O2 over time. Which means I’m not consuming it as fast as I thought.
line: Then, a quick EVA to a rover, where we keep the atmospheric analyzers. Nitrogen: 22%. Oxygen: 9%. Hydrogen: 64%.
line: I’m stil cowering in the rover, but I’ve had time to think. And I know how to deal with the hydrogen.
line: harmless. And the regulator is al about puling oxygen out of the air.
line: bilion little spacesuits handy.
line: Wel I think I’ve got it.
line: They haven’t even sprouted yet, so it’s not like they need light.
line: They say no plan survives first contact with implementation. I’d have to agree. Here’s what happened:
line: extra layers of clothes. Fortunately I’m not a very big man. Martinez’s clothes fit over mine, and Vogel’s fit over Martinez’s. These shitty clothes were designed to be worn in a temperature-controled environment. Even with three layers, I was stiline: I taped up eight of the intakes, leaving only one of them active. Then I taped the mouth of a Hefty-sized bag over the neck-hole of a
line: didn’t want to mess with mine (hey, it’s custom fitted!). That left me three spacesuits to work with.
line: Then I did it again. And again. Short bursts. Nothing flashy. I was happy to take my time.
line: The floor was covered in junk from al over the Hab. No hope of finding the medical O2 tank. No hope of finding anything in this mess
line: After a two second boot process (it was made to start up fast for obvious reasons) it immediately identified the problem.
line: wasn’t sure what. Or how.
line: machines, so it had to be done. I can’t just assume an explosion did no long-term damage.
line: Then came the critical part… checking the dirt. Taking a few samples from al over the Hab (remember, it’s al dirt flooring now), I
line: The temperature remained 15C for some time afterward, so any heat expansion should stil have been present. But the pressure
line: almost kiled me.
line: such a dumb-ass for not thinking of it! And my dumbassery almost got me kiled!
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 42
line: And seriously… It’s clear the General Lee can outrun a police cruiser. Why doesn’t Roscoe just go to the Duke farm and arrest them
line: The Director had given a speech as wel, reminding everyone that space flight is incredibly dangerous, and how we wil not back down
line: “Yeah, I’l be fine.”
line: “It’s simple, Teddy,” Venkat pressed on. “They evac’d after six sols. There’s almost an entire mission worth of supplies up there. It
line: “It’s just a first step. They evac’d because the wind was a threat to the MAV, but the Hab can withstand a lot more punishment. It
line: Venkat froze. “Then… but… what…”
line: “Realy, Teddy?” he said. “You’re afraid of a PR problem?”
line: “Ok, consider this,” he said. “Sympathy for Watney’s family is realy high. Ares 6 could bring the body back. We don’t say that’s the
line: Posting the data directly to internal servers, she composed an email to Dr. Kapoor. As she entered the latitude and longitude of the
line: Quickly bringing up the NASA intranet, she navigated through the site to the specifics of the Ares missions. After some quick research,
line: “I’m assuming you had a good reason. So?”
line: “Um,” she interrupted. “They look like rover pop-tents.”
line: “Wel, uh…” Venkat said, puzzled. “They obviously did, but it didn’t make it in to the log.”
line: Venkat’s eyes widened as he stared at the picture. “Oh…” he said quietly. “Oh god…”
line: “For starters, no body.” Venkat explained. “Also, the pop-tents are set up. And the solar cels are clean. You can thank Mindy Park in
line: Teddy frowned. “She must have parked it facing the Hab or she wouldn’t have been able to plug it in,” he said. “It’s been moved since
line: “What!?” Annie said. “How can you not tel them?”
line: “Mmm,” Annie said, “We can hold the pics for 24 hours before we’re required to make them public. We’l need to release a statement
line: “Got it.”
line: “Yeah, he’s alive,” Teddy said. “But if my math is right, he’s doomed to starve to death before we can possibly help him. I’m not
line: “Like, melting-the-pigeons strong-“ Morris supplied.
line: “Sorry.”
line: “Three,” Morris said.
line: Venkat pinched the bridge of his nose. “How could we overlook this?”
line: “This is a short, but very important announcement,” Annie said. “I won’t be taking any questions at this time, but we wil have a ful
line: “In the nine days since announcing Mark Watney’s survival, we’re received a massive show of support from al sectors. We’re using
line: “The questions are many: How long can he last? How much food does he have? Can Ares 4 rescue him? How wil we talk to him? The
line: “I like ideas,” Teddy said, gesturing to a seat.
line: “JPL strips it down, loses some weight, and adds some fuel tanks. Ares 4’s crew lands at the Ares 3 site, very efficiently. Then, with a ful burn, and I mean a full burn, they can lift off again. It can’t get back to orbit, but it can go to the Aresline: “They’re astronauts,” Venkat confirmed.
line: psychology?”
line: Even if I find a way to tel NASA I’m alive, there’s no guarantee they’l be able to save me. I need to be proactive. I need to figure out how to get to Ares 4.
line: I’m lucky. 3,200km isn’t that bad. It could have been up to 10,000km away. And because I’m on the flattest part of Mars, the first
line: spent two days in it during the “Great Hydrogen Scare of Sol 37.”
line: But I do have a free source of heat: Me. A couple milion years of evolution gave me “warm blooded” technology. I can wear layers.
line: How many solar cels wil I have to pilfer from the Hab’s farm?
line: Sometimes things are easy, and sometimes they’re not. Getting the battery out of Rover 1 was easy. I removed two clamps on the
line: In the event of a Hab breach, everyone would run to the airlocks. Procedure was to let it pop rather than die trying to prevent it. Then, we’d suit up and assess the damage. Once we found the breach, we’d seal it with the spare Hab canvas and resin. Tline: ring the battery up.
line: I spent the rest of the day sweeping off the solar cel farm. Soon, I shal be looting it.
line: Each solar cel is on a lightweight lattice that holds it at a 14 degree angle. I’l admit I don’t know why it’s a 14 degree angle. Something about maximizing solar energy. Anyway, removing the cels was simple. Then it was time to stack them on the roline: I came back to the Hab, had some lunch, and worked on my crops for the rest of the sol. It's been 39 sols since I planted the potatoes
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 66
line: Sirius 1 is complete!
line: that escaped my body just warmed up the interior. But there’s no such thing as perfect insulation, and eventualy the heat left to the great outdoors while I got colder and colder.
line: I came up with a solution, but… remember when I burned rocket fuel in the Hab? This’l be more dangerous.
line: Why not? It should be pretty fucking obvious why not! They didn’t want to put astronauts next to a glowing hot bal of radioactive
line: Watts of electricity. The MAV runs on that until the crew arrive.
line: Having rendered Rover 1 unusable, I’l have to use my Mutant Rover for the trip. I can make a useful test mission of it. I’l see how wel
line: disconcerting. Especialy when you know the root cause of the heat is radiation.
line: fuly removed the solid
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 70
line: That’l help. It’s going to take 12 hours to recharge, after al.
line: Looks like power and battery recharging is solved. Food’s not a problem; there’s plenty of space to store things. Water’s even easier
line: Mars has 1/90th Earth’s atmospheric pressure. The inside of the rover has 1 atmosphere. So the oxygen tanks are on the inside (less
line: Then, I’l deactivate the Atmospheric Regulator, so it doesn’t pul water out of the air. It’l be humid as hel, and water wil condense on
line: So that’s everything. Once I vent the CO2 in to the Hab, I’l turn off the Atmospheric Regulator and Oxygenator, dump a ton of water
line: Venkat nodded. “Certainly the most watched by NASA. We have al 12 of our Martian satelites taking pictures whenever his site’s in
line: when he drove 4km away, then back. Another incremental test, we think. Then, over the past couple of days, he’s been stocking it up with supplies.”
line: “So that would be a good thing, wouldn’t it?”
line: “Excelent point,” Cathy smiled. “So what are his odds right now?”
line: “Quit bitching, Bruce,” Annie said. “None of us want to be here.”
line: “She noticed he was alive in the first place.”
line: Annie leaned forward. “So far, so good,” she said. “The images are public, but we have no obligation to tel them our analysis. Nobody
line: “Bruce,” Teddy cautioned.
line: “You had an immediate answer,” Teddy said. “Good.”
line: “Mitch,” Venkat said. “We discussed this-“
line: “Bulshit,” Mitch grumbled, crossing his arms. “Total bulshit,”
line: “That’s what we’re thinking, yeah,” Venkat confirmed. “Problem is, the original plan was to launch presupplies a year from now.
line: “Get started. I’l find you the money.”
line: stunts in his life.
line: “No bother,” Venkat said. “I could use a break. What’s up?”
line: enough.”
line: “Welcome back,” Cathy said to the camera. “We’re chatting with Marcus Washington, from the US Postal Service. So, Mr.
line: “I bet they’re worth a pretty penny now.”
line: “What can you tel us about him? His personality, his mindset?”
line: “And they stil think he’s dead, right? The Ares 3 crew?”
line: “That’s one interpretation, yes,” Irene said.
line: “Let’s say we soft-land it perfectly. How wil Mark know it happened? And how wil he know where to look?”
line: “We have a plan for that. We’re going to make a bunch of bright green ribbons. Light enough to flutter around when dropped, even in
line: those ribbons.”
line: “Wait…” Venkat said. “Wait, no way…”
line: “Nope. I can’t draw on those,” he said. Then, rounding the corner to the break room, he pointed to the Mars map on the wal. “I can
line: “Hey!” The technician protested.
line: just need the solar cels cleaned. Even if it’s got a bigger problem, he’s an engineer!” Dialing, he added “Fixing shit is his job!”
line: pack and drink a cup of water. After that, I brush my teeth, using as little water as possible, and shave with an electric razor.
line: After securing the cels, I come back in, turn on some shitty ‘70’s music, and start driving. I putter along at 25kph, the rover’s top
line: I’m nostalgic for the Hab. How fucked up is that?
line: By my reckoning, I’m about 100km from Pathfinder. Technicaly it’s “Carl Sagan Memorial Station.” But with al due respect to Carl, I can cal it whatever the hel I want. I’m the King of Mars.
line:  a broad geological
line: Three sols later, Lewis Valey opened into a wide plain. So, again, I was left without references and relied on Phobos to guide me.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 81
line: After setting up the solar panels, I went for a little walk. I never left sight of the rover; the last thing I want to do is get lost on foot. But I couldn’t stomach crawling back into that cramped, smely rat’s nest. Not right away.
line: Man, I miss those guys.
line: rest, they deflated and the tetrahedron unfolded to reveal the probe.
line: when they last saw it. It probably entered a contingency mode and started circling the Lander, trying to communicate.
line: Over the decades, the baloons had ripped and filed with sand.
line: much. I could carry it around the Hab easily enough, but lifting it while wearing an awkward EVA suit? Out of the question.
line: baked by the sunlight. The dense layer of Mars crap al over it protected it from long-term solar damage.
line: Time to turn in. I’ve got a lot of backbreaking physical labor to do tomorrow. I’l need my rest.
line: The first few rocks were easy. Then they started feeling heavier and heavier. Hard physical labor in a spacesuit is murder. Everything’s more effort because you’re lugging 20kg of suit around with you, and your movement is limited. I was panting withiline: Ugh.
line: it impossible to get lost, and the terrain was smooth.
line: It just feels nice to be an astronaut again. That’s al it is. Not a reluctant farmer, not an electrical engineer, not a long haul trucker. An astronaut. I’m doing what astronauts do. I missed it.
line:  know, probes often refuse to obey directives, choosing instead to attack humans on sight.
line: fiber,” or whatever.
line: I’d give anything for just five minutes of Missed Orbit training. I’m realy feeling alone lately. Up til this road trip, I’ve been too busy to mope. But the long, dul days with nothing to do realy drives it home. I’m further away from other humansline: First, I fired up the Oxygenator and Atmospheric Regulator. Checking the air levels, everything looked good. There was stil CO2, so
line: Getting the Lander off the roof was a hel of a lot easier than getting it up there. I detached a strut from the MAV platform and dragged it over to the rover. Leaning it against the hul and digging the other end in to the ground for stability, I had a ramline: NASA decided 4km was the safe distance, and I wasn’t about to second-guess them. Driving back to where Commander Lewis had
line: hopelessly caked with dust.
line: Over time, the solar panels get covered with dust. Then winter brings colder temperatures and less daylight. This al combines into a big
line: I got my toolkit and started poking around. Opening the outer panel wasn’t too hard and I identified the battery easily enough. JPL
line: The battery was big and easy to identify, but I had no clue where the heaters were. Even if I knew, it’d be too risky to hook them
line: If the Lander comes back to life (and that’s a big if) it’l try to establish contact with Earth. Problem is, nobody’s listening. It’s not like the Pathfinder team is hanging around JPL just in case their long dead probe is repaired by a wayward asline: Also, Earth is only visible during the day. I (hopefuly) fixed the Lander yesterday evening. It’s morning now, so most of the intervening time has been night. No Earth.
line: VXWARE OPERATING SYSTEM (C) WIND RIVER SYSTEMS
line: ASI: NONFUNCTIONAL
line: LISTENING FOR TELEMETRY SIGNAL...
line: had worked around the clock, finishing only two days earlier.
line: “Tim,” he said, not taking his eyes off the screen.
line: “What about the camera?”
line: “We received the high-gain response just over half an hour ago,” Venkat said to the assembled press. “We immediately directed
line: “Our best guess is he took it in to the Hab. The Lander’s signal wouldn’t be able to reach Sojourner through Hab canvas.” Pointing to
line: “Jil Holbrook, BBC. With a 32 minute round trip, and nothing but a single rotating platform to talk with, it’l be a dreadfuly slow
line: “Noted.”
line: “We got a note from Mark!” Venkat announced to the room.
line: “‘Point here for no,’” Venkat read. “‘Wil check often for answer’”
line: The Sharpie I’m using wil last much longer than the cards, so ink isn’t a problem. But I have to do al my writing in the Hab. I don’t
line: How do I know which values go with which characters? Because Johanssen’s laptop is a wealth of information. I knew she’d have an
line: No physical problems. All Hab components functional. Eating 3/4 rations. Successfully growing crops in Hab with cultivated
line: Government watching me with satellites? Need tinfoil hat! Also need faster way to communicate. Speak&Spell taking all
line: Lewis disco sucks.
line: “Right. Wel, the thing is, Pathfinder has an OS update process. So we can change the software to anything we want.”
line: “And we can’t do that,” Venkat concluded. “Because we can’t talk to the rover.”
line: sequence the Hab sends. That way, natural radio waves won’t throw off the homing. If the bytes aren’t right, the rover ignores them.”
line: “That, and how to edit the files. And where to insert the instructions in the files.”
line: “It’s not that simple,” Venkat explained.
line: “Not enough,” Annie said. “The press is crawling down my throat for this. And up my ass. Both directions, Venkat! They’re gonna
line: an ASCII cheat-sheet I made. That’s one letter.
line: Not sure what they meant by “long message” but I figured I better be ready. I went out 15 minutes before the top of the hour and
line: Also, for some reason, they want me to hang around for the next pic. Not sure why. You can’t see any part of me when I’m in the suit.
line: “Have you met Mark Watney?”
line: communication with Watney.”
line: “What is with you? Why won’t you just tel them?”
line: outside. It’s just electronics, right? It’l keep warm enough to operate in the short term, and it doesn’t need air for anything.
line: “How long wil the patch take?” Venkat asked.
line: “You’re a very unpleasant man, Tim,” Jack said.
line: flight. They’ll pick you up, then take you with them to Schiaparelli. We’re putting
line: [11:52]WATNEY: The crops are potatoes, grown from the ones we were supposed to
line: [12:15]WATNEY: Look! A pair of boobs! -> (.Y.)
line: “I can take a guess,” said Teddy. “You want to tel the crew Watney’s alive.”
line: Mitch stood up. “Al right. Thanks,” he said as he left the office.
line: Martinez was first out of his bunk. An Air-Force man, he could match Lewis’s Navy schedule with ease. “Morning, Commander,” he
line: Johanssen fel out of her bunk, then remained on the floor.
line: “Not realy,” Martinez said.
line: “Mnrrn,” Johanssen grunted.
line: “Seems needlessly dangerous.”
line: “Ja,” Vogel said. “Please dig 30 centimeters and get soil samples. At least 100 grams each. Very important is 30 centimeters down.”
line: “Five here,” Martinez said. “Of course, we can’t expect the Navy to keep up with the Air Force, now can we?”
line: “Jesus, we’re gonna end up in Oz,” Watney said. “What’s the abort windspeed?”
line: “Visibility is almost zero,” Lewis said. “If you get lost, home in on my suit’s telemetry. The wind’s gonna be rougher away from the
line: “What happened?” Lewis said.
line: “He was right in front of me and then he was gone,” she said. “He flew off due west.”
line: Grabbing the emergency-launch checklist with one hand, he flicked switches rapidly with the other. One by one, the systems reported
line: “They sent that four and a half minutes ago,” Martinez continued, “while looking at satelite data from nine minutes ago.”
line: “Copy,” Lewis said. “Are you at pilot-release?”
line: “I just ordered you to,” Lewis replied. “You three, get to the ship.”
line: “Johanssen,” she said. “Would the rover IR camera do any good?”
line: “Give it a try,” Lewis said.
line: “It can barely see the Hab,” he replied. “The sandstorm’s fucking things up. Even if it wasn’t, there’s not enough metal in- Shit!”
line: Bringing the Orbital Maneuvering System online, he fired a sustained burn from the nosecone array. The smal thrusters fought against
line: “12.9 degrees,” Johanssen said.
line: “I know,” Martinez said. “I can dock without nose vents if I have to.”
line: “Copy,” she finaly replied. “On my way.”
line: The retaining clamps ejected from the launch gantry, faling to the ground. Seconds later, preignition pyros fired, igniting the main
line: pressed back in to their couches as the next stage began. Outside, the now-empty first stage fel away, eventualy to crash on some
line: with the backlog of work. The schedule had been made for six, not five.
line: Johanssen sat at her station. Lewis sat in the adjacent seat while Vogel and Martinez hovered nearby. The data dump carried emails
line: She looked over her shoulder to Lewis.
line: Vogel stood agape as a shocked expression swept across his face.
line: The message’s end brought stunned silence to the bridge.
line: Beck looked to Martinez pleadingly. Martinez opened his mouth, but could find no words to say.
line: They want constant updates on every Hab system, and they’ve got a room ful of people trying to micromanage my crops. It’s
line: I go to the rover five times a day to check mail. They can get a message from Earth to Mars, but they can’t get it another 10 meters to
line: It’s a shitty way to communicate. Hopefuly it won’t come up.
line: potato farm so they have more time to work on it.
line: doing your tasks, but it's only botany (not real science) so it's easy. How's Mars?
line: the man with the clipboard placed it on the package. “Project Ares-3; Hab Canvas; Sheet AL102.”
line: I wish I had a straw hat and some suspenders.
line: In other news, I got email from Venkat Kapoor:
line: Also, an uncomfortable side note... NASA is putting together a committee. They
line: Also please tell them that each and every one of their mothers are prostitutes.
line: Deflating its balloons, the onboard computer reported the successful landing back to Earth.
line: NASA, however, is absolutely shitting itself. They see the Water Reclaimer as a critical survival element. There’s no backup, and they
line: After erecting the main structure of the Hab, they assembled the three airlocks. Sheet AL102 had a hole perfectly sized for
line: Yeah, I know. NASA has a lot of ultra-smart people and I should realy do what they say. And I’m being too adversarial, considering
line: air (you exhale almost as much water as you piss). I’ve mixed my water with soil, making it mineral water. The minerals built up in the
line: The layers of plastic, constantly bending, heated the resin from pure friction. The new, more yielding environment allowed the
line: preferred it to the other two.
line: thing’s been on the surface for decades. A little gale won’t do any harm.
line: Anyway, al that wil have to wait. I’ve got a ful day today. After cleaning the solar cels, I have to check the whole solar array make
line: abuses had stretched the vertical fibers apart and weakened the horizontal ones beyond use.
line: bones. He tried to make sense of the situation, but was barely conscious.
line: “You fucking kidding me?” He said.
line: The airlock’s on its side, and I can hear a steady hiss. So either it’s leaking or there are snakes in here. Either way, I’m in trouble.
line: I’m stil fucked, mind you. Just not as deeply.
line: I need to find the leak. I think it’s near my feet, judging by the sound. Now that I’m out of the suit, I can turn around and get a look…
line: I just realized I do have something flammable: My own hair. It’l have to do. There’s a sharp knife in the tool-kit. I’l shave some arm
line: Fun fact: This is exactly how the Apolo 1 crew died. Wish me luck!
line: send the smoke everywhere.
line: over the airlock fracture. But I don’t have time.
line: AUDIO LOG: SOL 119
line: Looking around, the only thing I see that can hold an atmosphere is the EVA suit itself. There’s plenty of material to work with, and I
line: I’l be spreading the resin pretty thin, but it’s literaly the strongest adhesive known to man. And it doesn’t have to be a perfect seal. It just has to last long enough for me to get to safety.
line: I pressed the rectangle of suit material on to the helmet. I held it firmly with both hands while using my knee to keep pressure on the
line: Answer: Not very.
line: breathing turned some oxygen in to carbon dioxide, which was captured by the suit’s CO2 filters.
line: Reclaimer, no Oxygenator, no food. Take your pick; al of those problems are fatal.
line: Stil, it’s a place to start.
line: First I tried launching myself off one wal and slamming in to the other. The airlock slid a little, but that’s it.
line: I have a hel of a backache.
line: If I run out of time before finding a suit, I’l just run to the rover. I’d be in trouble, but I’d have time to think and materials to work with.
line: arm. The feed is projected on the inner faceplate. This alows us to look at things just by pointing at them.
line: Trudging onward, I got to where I’d left Martinez’s suit. To my shock, it was stil there!
line: better.
line: Got a good night’s sleep, and made real progress today.
line: refiling the tanks was a breeze.
line:  them had broken. They’re just lying flat is al. I’l have to re-couple a few of them, but that’l be easy.
line: Potatoes are now extinct on Mars.
line: Chapter 15
line: patched up the Hab and repressurized it (main air tanks were intact). I just got
line: sure I can fix it. Hab’s main computer also functioning without any problems. Any
line: I’ll start starving on Sol 584.
line: descent lander. It'l have to be a tumbler. So we can't put anything delicate inside. Say goodbye to the al the other crap we'd planned to send.”
line: steal from them, and that'l save us some time. Also, we're sending food, which is pretty robust. Even if there's a reentry problem and the probe impacts at high velocity, food is stil food.
line: now that I replaced the burst hoses. As for water supply, I have 620L remaining. I
line: Rich Purnel sipped coffee in the silent building. Only his cubicle iluminated the otherwise dark room. Continuing with his computations, he ran a final test on the software he'd written. It passed.
line: Mike, he typed, Attached are the courses for Iris, in 1-day increments. We should start peer-review and vetting so they can be officially accepted. And you were right, I was here almost all night.
line: “Hmm.” he said.
line: “We've got a control room ready,” Mitch replied. “I'l oversee the launch, then hand cruise and landing over to Venkat's guys.”
line: “We're behind,” Bruce said with a tired shake of his head. “We're going as fast as we can, but it's just not fast enough.”
line: “15 days,” Bruce responded. “If I had another 15 days, I'm sure we could get it done in time.”
line: “Remember,” Venkat interjected, “Iris is a tumbler; he might have to drive a few days to get it. And I'm guessing it's hard to control a rover when you're literaly starving to death.”
line: A silence fel over the room.
line: He looked around the table. Blank faces stared back.
line: Keler nodded silently.
line: “I need some supercomputer time.” Rich said.
line: Mike rubbed his eyes. “Ok, whatever. About those satelite orbits...?”
line: years. You may as well make use of me.
line: had been set up in the cafeteria. Fuly a third of them would normaly be asleep at this hour, but they did not want to miss this moment.
line: from the President, and a USB drive filed with music from al ages.”
line: r survival is giving us more knowledge about Mars than the rest of the Ares program combined.”
line: systems ready,” he broadcast, “Give me a go/no-go for launch. Talker?”
line: “Go.”
line: Teddy sat in the VIP observation room behind mission control. His authority afforded him the very best seat: front-row center. His
line: “ACC.”
line: “Go.”
line: “Roger,” Mitch said checking the countdown. “This is Flight, we are go for launch on schedule.”
line: thought.
line: “Course?” He asked.
line: “A slight shimmy. On-board guidance is handling it.”
line: The harmless shimmy, caused by a minor fuel mixture imbalance, rattled the payload. Mounted by strong bolts, Iris held firm. The
line: “More than we like,” he said. “But the accelerometers caught it and calculated the new center of mass. The guidance computer is
line: As the second stage fired, the craft experienced a sudden jolt of immense force. No longer contending with the dead-weight of the first
line: From there, the other three failed in rapid succession.
line: “At least 5 rps, and faling off course.”
line: “Affirm, Flight. Intermittent signal from the ship, but no probe.”
line: “No luck,” said Comm.
line: Then he uttered the words every Flight Director hopes never to say: “GC, Flight. Lock the doors.”
line: Martinez:
line: I'm not giving up. Just planning for every outcome. It's what I do.
line: not infer from lack of openness which launches contained classified payloads.
line: “And how are launch preparations coming along?”
line: Guo Ming leaned back in his chair. “What are you saying?”
line: “How much mass could we send?” Guo Ming asked.
line: probe would have to be launched within a month. Even then he would starve a little.”
line: He clasped his hands behind his back. “And the American people may be sentimental, but their government is not. The US State
line: “They'l put a Chinese astronaut on Mars.”
line: Your poster outsold the rest of ours combined. You're a hot chick who went to
line: unfairly jaded view.
line: “Sorry, what?” Jack Trevor stammered.
line: system. Aerosol propelant would be best. High-gain radio so we can talk to it, and standard satelite navigational software.
line: summary...”
line: “We're sure as hel going to try,” Venkat said, a note of annoyance in his voice.
line: “I don't know, Venkat said. “Friends?”
line: Being your backup has backfired.
line: My life is now a desperate struggle for survival... with occasional titration.
line: “Are we going to make a momentous decision?” Bruge Ng asked.
line: came up with would give Hermes a Mars flyby on Sol 549.”
line: “Wel,” Venkat began, “If they did this 'Rich Purnel Maneuver,' they'd start accelerating right away, to preserve their velocity and gain even more. They wouldn't intercept Earth at al, but would come close enough to use a gravity assist to adjust coline: “3,235km to be exact,” Venkat said. “It's not out of the question. He drove to Pathfinder's landing site and back. That's over
line: “Earlier,” Teddy said, “You mentioned a supply probe for Hermes. We have that capability?”
line: Venkat. “He wants us to decide instead.”
line: “The crash-lander?” Mitch said. “Does anyone think that'l work? Anyone?”
line: “Space travel is dangerous,” Mitch said. “We can't make this a discussion about what's safest.”
line: make this decision?”
line: “Al right,” Teddy said. “Everyone, we discuss this only in person or on the phone; never email. And don't talk to anyone about this, other than the people here. The last thing we need is public opinion pressing for a risky cowboy rescue that may be line: anything. She's weird.
line: Mitch slammed his fist on the table.
line: have to be adults. This isn't a TV show; the riskier solution isn't always the best.”
line: Annie quietly gathered her things and placed them in her briefcase.
line: Don’t.
line: Disco? I can understand the '70's TV because everyone loves hairy people with huge
line: Completing the check, he ran a diagnostic on the engines. They were functioning at peak. He did al this from his quarters. Al on-board
line: simulated gravity. Johanssen's door was open, as usual.
line: “It is on my shared space. The name is 'kinder.jpg'.”
line: The Hermes crew enjoyed their scant personal time in an area caled “The Rec”. Consisting of a table and barely room to seat six, it
line: Lewis leaned forward. “There was more in the message,” she began. “The maneuver is part of an overal idea NASA had to rescue
line: They al looked to Lewis.
line: rest of you, I guarantee they'l never send you up again.”
line: Mission Control.”
line: “You're sure?” Lewis asked. “You can turn it off?”
line: Everyone knew Brendan Hutch would be running missions soon.
line: With Hermes 90 light-seconds away, back-and-forth voice communication was impractical. Other than media relations, Hermes would
line: “Hermes is off-course.”
line: told us.”
line: “Do what?” Mitch asked.
line: “Alleged stunt,” Mitch said. “I suppose Annie wil tel the media we decided to try this risky maneuver? And she'l leave out the mutiny part?”
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 192
line: Wel... not right away. I stil have to do the aforementioned shitload of work.
line: It does have air tanks, but they're empty. An Ares mission needs lots of O2, N2 and water anyway. Why send more with the MAV?
line: I have a lot of problems to solve, but I have a lot of smart people to solve them. Pretty much the whole planet Earth.
line: I hope you like drilling. The drill bit is 1cm wide, the holes will be 0.5cm
line: If it doesn't, we need time to come up with new ones.
line: I managed to not kil myself today, even though I was working with high voltage. Wel, it's not as exciting as al that. I disconnected the line before I fucked with it.
line: like Apolo astronauts.
line: [10:25] JPL: Glad to hear it. Starting on the cut sounds great. Just to be clear,
line: [10:43] Watney: Roger. Take a pic at 11:30 if you haven't heard from me by then.
line: I unraveled Martinez's bed and took the string outside. I taped it to the trailer hul along the path I planned to cut. Yes, of course duct tape works in a near-vacuum. Duct tape works anywhere. Duct tape is magic and should be worshiped.
line: First, I depressurized the trailer. Cal me crazy, but I didn't want the dril explosively launched at my face.
line: workbench for a few minutes and it cooled down. One thing you can say about Mars: It's really cold. The thin atmosphere doesn't conduct heat very wel, but it cools everything eventualy.
line: once in a while.
line: Earth and tel me the best way to get it done.
line: But I settled on Stayin' Alive by the Bee Gees.
line: I miss tending the potatoes. The Hab isn't the same without them.
line: I started my EVA around 08:45, same as always. I got my hammer and screwdriver and started chipping the trailer's hul. It's a pain in
line: For me, it was when the dril didn't start.
line: I reported my progress.
line: I waited another 30 minutes. Stil no reply. Fear started to take root.
line: I tried not to panic. The troubleshooting sheet has a list of things to try if communication is lost. They are (in order):
line: e insulation had melted.
line: The hul sat on Panel A, one of four sides of the tetrahedron which brought Pathfinder the Mars. The other 3 sides are stil in Ares Valis where I left them.
line: Pathfinder's dead. I've lost the ability to contact Earth.
line: Ok, enough self-pity. I'm not doomed. Things wil be just be harder than planned. I have al I need to survive. And Hermes is stil on the
line: Problem is, they soak up a lot of power, and have to run al day long. The rover batteries have 18kwh of juice. The Oxygenator alone
line: Conclusion: I don't need the Water Reclaimer at al. I'l drink as needed, and dump my waste outdoors. Yeah, that's right Mars, I'm
line: Then there's the matter of the Atmospheric Regulator. The regulator samples the air, figures out what's wrong with it, and corrects the
line: worlds. Literaly. Side note: Mars's atmosphere does condense at the poles. In fact, it solidifies into dry ice.
line: have 50 liters of liquid oxygen in two 25L tanks here in the Hab. That's 50,000L in gaseous form, enough to last 85 days. Not enough to
line: Yes, the RTG. You may remember it from my exciting trip to Pathfinder. A lovely lump of Plutonium so radioactive it gives off 1500
line: I spent the rest of the day double-checking my numbers and running more tests. It al checks out. I can do this.
line: Oxygenator, of course. Rather than weigh al that shit, I took a guess and caled it 1200kg.
line: oxygen. My 65 sol trip would become 91!
line: I stored it on the roof of the rover for the trip back. That puppy realy spews heat.
line: I took Johanssen's cot and cut out the hammock. Then I draped spare Hab canvas over the frame, making a pit inside the cot, with
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 207
line: Let's get greedy. Lets say I can find a home for 14 more panels instead of 7. Not sure how to do that, but let's say I can. That would
line: BACK. BETTER NOW. CONTINUING ROVER MODS.”
line:  to test. It was obvious by looking and I didn't want to break shit.
line: ectricity.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 209
line: suit. I took each strut apart, yielding a bunch of metal strips.
line: 28 solar cels, baby! And room for one extra!
line: Then I yanked the driver's seat and control panel out of the trailer. The link-up with the rover is physical. The trailer doesn't do anything but get dragged along and fed air. It doesn't need controls or brains. However, I did salvage its computer. It's line: The trailer's battery is in the undercarriage, but the main power line runs through the pressure vessel. I was able to wire the Hab
line: dying would be way worse. And I won't find out how the launch went til I get to Schiapareli.
line: “Don't get me wrong,” Robert quickly added, “I understand why you're doing al this. Stil, from a selfish point of view, I miss my wife.
line: “An original production 8-track of Abba's Greatest Hits. Stil in the original packaging.”
line: “Don't get too comfortable,” Teddy said. “We stil have to go through customs and we'l probably have to fil out a bunch of forms
line: They turned to see a young Chinese man wearing casual attire. “My name is Su Bin Bao,” he said in perfect English. “I am an employee
line: “Helena, my love, ” Vogel said to his wife. “I trust you are well? ”
line: “As well as can be expected, ” Helena said. “She has her good days and bad days. My last few visits, she didn't recognize me. In a way, it's a blessing. She doesn't have to worry about you like I do. ”
line: Su Bin translated Guo Ming's words as Teddy took the second-best seat in the observation room.
line: Su Bin paused before translating, but pressed on.
line: “Cause I'm the EVA specialist.”
line: “Kind of,” Beck said. “He fixes stuff.”
line: “The engineers here made it for me special,” Mitch said.
line: Marissa continued to wave David's hand at the camera. David was more interested in his other hand, which was actively engaged in
line: “I have to wait another 533 days to get laid!”
line: “So Dr. Kapoor, tel us about the Taiyang Shen. Why go to China to launch a probe? Why not launch it from the US?”
line: “Who wil be controling it?” Cathy asked.
line: “Exactly like that,” Venkat said. “And we estimate it would take 4 trips back and forth. But that's al an edge case. We don't anticipate any problems with the docking process.”
line: “Your mother is so worried she couldn't even come.”
line: Johanssen shrugged.
line: “I know,” Johanssen mumbled. “But...”
line: “Yeah,” she said.
line: Commander Lewis picked me to be the survivor. She told me about it yesterday. I don't think NASA knows about it.”
line: “Perfect launch,” Venkat said enthusiasticaly.
line: He turned to Venkat. “It could have been a lasting legacy of scientific research. Now it's a delivery run. We'l get a Chinese astronaut
line: “Visual contact,” Beck's voice came over the radio. He stood in Airlock 3 (via magnetic boots), fuly suited up with the outer door
line: “Al stats nominal,” Martinez reported.
line: “12m,” Johanssen replied. “Velocity steady at 0.9m/s.”
line: “Roger that, commander,” Beck said. “Closing airlock.”
line: Vogel de-suit.”
line: “Not listening,” she caled back.
line: attach it to the inside of the trailer. After pressurizing and sealing up leaks as I found them, I had a nice big baloon bulging out of the trailer.
line: move the AREC over.
line: top and down the inside wal. Then I coiled it in the bottom to make a spiral. I glued it in place like that, and sealed the end. Using my smalest dril bit, I put dozens of little holes in the coil. The idea is for the return air to pass through the water line: It worked great! The air bubbled through, just like I'd hoped. Even better, the bubbles agitated the water, which distributed the heat
line: So Mars is “international waters.”
line: You may be wondering what I do with my free time. I spent a lot of it sitting around on my lazy ass watching TV. But so do you, so
line: Things wil be smooth while I'm in Acidalia, but that's only the first 650km. After that comes the crater-riddled terrain of Arabia Terra.
line: reeked of body odor. Same as my colege days.
line:  This way, I'l be able to walk right in. No EVA.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 387
line: Problem is (folow me closely here, the science is pretty complicated) if I cut a hole in the Hab, the air won't stay inside anymore.
line: I have enough to last til launch, so I won't starve. But I'm pretty damn sick of potatoes. Also, they have a lot of fiber, so... let's just say it's good I'm the only guy on this planet.
line: dissolved in it.” I ran out of real coffee months ago.
line: many scenarios NASA accounted for. One system at a time, I cleanly shut them al down, ending with the main computer itself.
line: Anyway, it means I only needed to cut two big-ass strips of canvas. One for the wals and one for the ceiling.
line: I pressurized to a ful atmosphere and waited an hour. No leaks.
line: Today's task was the bedroom.
line: It was so much easier without the EVA suit on. So much easier!
line: Just like before, I let it sit for an hour. And just like before, it worked great. Unlike the Hab canvas resealing, I got this one right on the first try. Mostly because I didn't have to do it with a damn EVA suit on.
line: Shelter: Rover, trailer, bedroom.
line: Since Sol 6 al I've wanted to do was get the hel out of here. Now the prospect of leaving the Hab behind scares the shit out of me. I
line: the other wil instantly seal off the shared lines.
line: and not delicate. They probably won't al fit, so some wil have to ride with me.
line: the same patterns so I figured he likes to start work around then. I did some minor realignment to get seventeen pics between 9:00 and
line: “What's Watney doing here?”
line: “We'l assign that to other people,” Venkat said. “From now on, your only focus is examining imagery of Ares 3.”
line: “How long have you worked for the government?” Venkat sighed.
line: Both are way too big to fit through the trailer airlock. Lucky for me, they came to Mars with “some assembly required”. They were too
line: enance purposes. We could fix things in the field easier that way.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 435
line: I got in the rover, and attached the bedroom to the outer airlock door from the inside. Like I mentioned before, this is the only way to do it. Then I turned it loose on an unsuspecting Mars.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 436
line: Once I did that, I took off the uncomfortable EVA suit. The bedroom was on the other side of the airlock door, stil fuly pressurized.
line: “We've got some developments,” Venkat said. “Mindy, why don't you bring them up to date.”
line: “Clever,” Teddy said.
line: Randal nodded. “Thank you, Dr. Kapoor.” He turned his laptop around to show a map of Mars. “Over the past few weeks, a dust
line: “So he gets less power.” Annie said. “Can't he just recharge longer?”
line: She shook her head. “The satelites won't be able to see through the dust. Once he enters the affected area, we won't see anything until
line: There are a lot of ways I could lose pressure in this mechanical abomination I've created, and I don't want al my water to boil off if that happens.
line: “I repaired the bad cable on VASIMR 4,” Vogel reported. “It was our last thick gauge cable. If another such problem occurs, we wil
line: “Wil we be able to maintain engine power for the rest of the mission?”
line:  non-temperature-sensitive cargo, but that's about it.”
line: “You're not mad?”
line: fucking cold. The rover and trailer regulate their own temperatures just fine, but things weren't hot enough in the bedroom.
line: First, I put on an EVA suit. Then I close the inner airlock door, leaving the outer door (which the bedroom is attached to) open. This
line: Then, back to the rover. Once inside, I take off the EVA suit and start driving. I drive for almost 4 hours, and then I'm out of power.
line: up the Oxygenator and let it work through the backlog of CO2 the Regulator had stored up.
line: powered, but it's nice to have backups.
line: now it was dead quiet. It's a creepy, eerie kind of quiet that's hard to describe. I've been away from the Hab before, but always in the rover or an EVA suit. There's always some kind of machinery in operation.
line: Actualy, it's not an impressive accomplishment. I've only been traveling 10 sols. But it's a good psychological milestone.
line: Then I chil out in the bedroom or rover. I have the whole day to myself. The bedroom gives me enough space that I don't feel cooped up,
line: Kapoor. Dr. Kapoor, I guess what people want to know is: Is Mark Watney doomed?”
line: “He's just entered Mawrth Valis now. At his current rate of travel, he'l be at the edge of the Tau Event on Sol 471. That's 12 days
line: dissipate unexpectedly. Maybe he'l find a way to keep his life support going on less energy than we thought was possible. Mark Watney is now an expert at surviving on Mars. If anyone can do it, it's him.”
line: se they were included for landing purposes; in case Martinez had to land way long of our target.
line: Because Phobos is ridiculously close to Mars, it orbits the planet in less than one Martian day. So it travels west to east (unlike the sun and Deimos) and sets every 11 hours. And naturaly, it moves in a very predictable pattern.
line: To save time, Mindy had taught herself Morse Code so she wouldn't have to look each letter up every morning. Opening an email, she
line: Want to know what's at elevation zero? On Earth, it's sea level. Obviously, that won't work on Mars. So lab-coated geeks got together
line: have to be on my guard; observant at al times. I'l need to navigate with landmarks as wel as latitude and longitude.
line: NASA's watching me. So I'm labeling each sample by the current sol. They'l know my location a hel of a lot more accurately than I do.
line: It'l cost me a hundred kilometers or so to go around, but it can't be helped. I'l try to aim for the southern edge. The closer I get to the rim the less time I waste going around it.
line: “It's pretty bleak, Rick,” Lewis said. “He's already 50km in to the storm, and he'l go another 90km per sol. He'l get in too deep to
line: “Damn right,” he smiled.
line: impunity. There'l stil be plenty of craters in the way, but they're comparatively smal and going around them won't cost much time.
line: In other news, my equipment is starting to show signs of age. Not surprising, considering it's way the hel past its expiration date. For the past two sols, the batteries have taken longer to recharge. The solar cels just aren't producing as much wattage aline: Marth isn't too steep. I could probably just drive down one side and up the other. It's big enough that I'd end up camping inside it one night. But I don't want to take unnecessary risks. Slopes are bad and should be avoided. I gave myself plenty of buffeline: Craaaaap.
line: seemed hazier than it should. I'm accustomed to the wide-open expanses of Acidalia Planitia, my former prairie home.
line: 1) The only explanation for asymmetrical visibility is a dust storm.
line: I don't have satelite imagery. I have no way of knowing the size or shape of the storm, or its heading. Man, I'd give anything for a 5-
line: But today, he had not moved, and it was wel past morning.
line: The storm is just dust in the air; it's not dangerous to the rovers. I can think of it as “Percent power loss.” I checked yesterdays power generation and it was 97% of optimal. So right now, it's a 3% storm.
line: times of day. Then I'd know how fast the storm is moving, at least in terms of percent power loss.
line: I'm hoping to go south. Schiapareli is southeast of me. Going north would add a lot of time to my total trip.
line: I made the bedroom in to a lab. I stacked my supply containers to form a rudimentary table, and used a sample box as a stool.
line: camera was properly recording the readout of the power meter.
line: brought them back in to check the results. They worked great.
line: gone the ful 80km, set up my solar cels for charging, and I'm logging the wattage.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 479
line: The best way to avoid it is to go south.
line: The storm is probably circular. They usualy are. But I could just be driving in to an alcove. If that's the case, I'm just fucking dead, ok?
line: Sheesh.
line: www.watch-mark-watney-die.com. So there's like a hundred milion people or so who know exactly how far south it goes.
line: got another 1030km to get there.
line: makeshift radio when I'l have a brand new, fuly functional communication system within a couple of weeks.
line: Nice.
line: So here's my briliant plan: I won't use the bedroom as a bedroom anymore once I get to the MAV. I'l use it to house the Oxygenator
line: here 492 sols and they've worked fine the whole time, so I'l take that risk.
line: the-napkin math and the slope should be pretty safe. The elevation change from the rim to the basin is 1.5km, and the Ramp is at least
line: The high pressure zone created by the wind now had an avenue to drain. The breach widened more and more with each passing
line: Upon reaching Entrance Crater, the lone inhabitant of Mars turned his vehicle toward the Schiapareli Basin. The difficult terrain was
line: The trailer, attached to the rover with a tow clamp, was dragged along. The torsion on the clamp snapped the strong composite like a
line: "Jesus," Mitch said. "What the hel happened?"
line: You can see the trench it left behind. The trailer flipped forward on to its roof."
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 498
line: And that means the trailer junction snapped. Wonderful.
line: I'm realy damn close to the MAV now. About 220km. I'm not going to let something like this stop me from getting there. And I don't
line: I tried pushing the rover over, but I wasn't strong enough. I'l need to rig something to get a leverage advantage. Other than being on its side, I don't see any real problems.
line: “That's al he said,” she reported, cradling the phone as she typed out an email to the list of interested parties.
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 499
line: Good thing, too. Because it doubles as rope.
line: rover finaly tipped.
line: Mars is not Earth. It doesn't have a thick atmosphere to bend light and carry particles that reflect light around corners. It's damn-near a vacuum here. Once the sun isn't visible, I'm in the dark. Phobos gives me some moonlight, but not enough to work wiline: The trailer was upside down with its nose pointed downhil. I decided the best way to right it was to take advantage of the slope and
line: I'l be away from the wal. But for now, it's another early night.
line: longer had my CO2 production to deal with. The atmosphere in the trailer was perfect, why change anything?
line: That's my heating system.
line: I need a way to know if the ground in front of me is safe. At least for the duration of my time on The Ramp. Once I'm in the Schiapareli Basin proper, I can count on the normal sandy terrain I'm used to.
line: 40km. I can take my time and get safely to the bottom. It should take about 8 hours.
line: “Great news,” Bruce's voice came in through the speakerphone.
line: “Definitely,” Venkat said. “It'l be nice to have some good news for a change. Mindy, how long until he gets to the MAV?”
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 502
line: have driven ful speed and had no problems. But better safe than sorry.
line: fel. So today's driving was abbreviated.
line: NASA has the MAV broadcasting the Ares 3 Hab homing signal. Why wouldn't they? It makes perfect sense. Unlike my worn out
line: The MAV waited in southwestern Schiapareli. It stood an impressive 27 meters tal, its conical body gleaming in the midday sun.
line: Now fatigued, the astronaut stood with arms akimbo, looking up at the sleek lines of the engineering marvel before him.
line: I'm guessing folks at NASA are popping champagne right now and sending me lots of messages. I'l read them in a bit. First things first:
line: potatoes left. I'm good to last till 549.
line: MAV.
line: Venkat flipped through the pages. “Care to summarize?”
line: “I see. And what does 780kg of fuel buy us?” Venkat asked.
line: “Won't that make it awkward for him to use the controls?” Venkat asked.
line: “I'm just getting started,” Bruce said. “The power needs wil be dramaticaly reduced now that life support is gone, so we'l dump three
line: “We'l remove the nose airlock, the windows, and Hul Panel 19.”
line: Should be good.”
line: “Yeah. The Stage One booster works fine if one engine goes out. It'l save us a huge amount of weight. Only during the Stage One
line: its supposed to.”
line: enough aerodynamics in Mars's atmosphere.
line: It attaches to the rover airlock, so the only way to get stuff in is annoying. Bring the stuff into the rover, attach the bedroom to the airlock from the inside, inflate it, bring the stuff in to the bedroom. I'l also have to empty the bedroom of al toolsline: Everything's stil working fine, though it's wearing down. The Regulator and Oxygenator are less than peak efficiency (to say the least)
line: “Don't sweat it,” Lewis said. “That's why we dril. You've stil got three weeks to get it right.”
line: force on her diminished to nearly zero as she reached the core. Vogel looked up from a computer console. “Commander?”
line: the Airlock 2 ready room.
line: “So, including the MMU safe speed, we need to get within 20 meters per second of his velocity.”
line: “But we could double or even triple our safe intercept range-”
line: I'm not improvising anything. I'm folowing a script sent by NASA, which was set up to make things as easy as possible. Sometimes I
line: The last time I had to get hydrogen out of the air (back when I turned the Hab in to a bomb) I burned it to turn it in to water. Obviously that would be counter-productive.
line: Then I opened the inner airlock door and had it evacuate the trailer. It pumped al the air in to the airlock's holding tank. And there you have it, a tank of pure hydrogen.
line: [19:24]JOHANSSEN: Yes, NASA gave the OK for direct communication an hour ago.
line: [19:27]JOHANSSEN: It's the least we could do. How is the MAV retrofit going?
line: LOG ENTRY: SOL 543
line: The crew floated in the Rec. They had halted the rotation of the ship in preparation for the upcoming operation.
line: “Ok,” Lewis said. “The battle plan is pretty obvious. Martinez wil fly the MAV, Johanssen wil sysop the ascent. Beck and Vogel, I
line: “We'l get him, Commander,” Martinez said. “24 hours from now, Mark Watney wil be right here in this room.”
line: “Get some sleep, boss,” Brendan said.
line: “What's our role in al this?” Annie said. “If something goes wrong, what can Mission Control do?”
line: Right now, I'm sitting in the MAV. I'm suited up because there's a big hole in the front of the ship where the window and part of the hul used to be. I'm “awaiting launch instructions.” Realy, I'm just awaiting launch. I don't have any part in this. Iline: ense lack of oxygen. I'd just get tired, fal asleep, then die.
line: sheer terror. The NASA representative knew not to disturb them, but stood ready to answer any questions should they ask.
line: “Pilot.”
line: “Secondary Recovery.”
line: “We're going to make that happen,” Lewis said. “Remember, you'l be puling some pretty heavy G's. It's ok to pass out. You're in
line: “Didn't think I'd be back here again,” Beck said.
line: “If I can't reach Mark, I want you to release my tether.”
line: Vogel did not respond.
line: The MAV launched with incredible force. More than any manned ship had accelerated in the history of space travel. Watney was
line: “I know,” Martinez said. “It's sluggish; fighting me. What the fuck is going on?”
line: five sides instead of six. It would require a special wrench to tighten or loosen.
line: “It was like flying a cow,” Martinez grumbled, his hands racing over his controls.
line: orbit.”
line: worked out by Vogel, but he was otherwise engaged. Johanssen was his backup for orbital dynamics.
line: “Then we'l have to go to him. Johanssen, time to intercept?”
line: “Checking,” Martinez said, running the numbers on his console. “We'd get a delta-v of 31 meters per second.”
line: “Aye.” Martinez said.
line: “No,” Venkat said. “They'l get to him, but they'l be going 42 meters per second when they get there.”
line: “Watney,” Lewis said “Do you read?”
line: “Vogel?”
line: Little remained of the canvas. Tatters floated along the edge of the hole it once covered. This granted Watney an unobstructed view of
line: “How do you feel?”
line: “Wel shit.”
line: “How does he come up with this shit?” Martinez interjected.
line: She furrowed her brow. “Hmm... Maybe it's not such a bad idea...”
line: “Um. Yes, Commander,” Martinez said.
line: “We don't have to,” Lewis said. “The VAL is in the nose. Escaping air would make a thrust vector through our center of mass. We just
line: “Johanssen,” Lewis said. “time to intercept?”
line: “Fuck me raw,” Annie said, getting up. “I better get to the press room. Any parting knowledge before I go?”
line: “Ja,” Vogel said. “We have flammables and pure oxygen.”
line: “We could run the wire to lighting panel 41,” Johanssen said. “It's next to the airlock, and I can turn it on and off from here.”
line: “Beck,” Lewis said to her headset. “I'l need you back in, too. But don't take your suit off.”
line: to get back to Airlock 2.”
line: “We're going to blow a hole in the VAL.”
line: Being a chemist, Vogel knew how to make a bomb. In fact, much of his training was to avoid making them by mistake.
line: “Sehr gefährlich,” he mumbled as he poured liquid oxygen from the ship's supply in to the container, then quickly screwed the stopper
line: He entered the airlock and sealed the inner door. After depressurizing, he opened the outer door and locked it in place. Grabbing a
line: She twisted the lighting wires to the bomb's and taped them off.
line: Beck's out on the hul.”
line: “Copy,” Beck said as he attached his tether. The two men pressed themselves against the wal.
line: “28 seconds,” Johanssen said.
line: Teddy took his seat in the VIP room. “What's the status?” He asked.
line: She pressed enter.
line: “Reactor room stil pressurized,” Martinez reported.
line: “Beck,” Lewis said. “You're up. 12 meters per second.”
line: rescuing a crewmate whose tether had broken, but the principle was the same.
line: “Going to coast for a bit,” Beck said. “Gotta catch up before I slow it down.” He rotated himself in preparation for the next burn.
line: “Contact,” Beck said. Firming his grip, he puled his body forward and lashed out with his other hand to grab more canvas. “Firm
line: “I... I just...” Watney said. “Give me a minute. You're the first person I've seen in 18 months.”
line: “We're out,” Beck reported.
line: Hermes puled Beck and Watney along, with Vogel's use of the tether acting as a shock absorber. If Vogel used too much force the
line: “Aboard!” Beck said.
line: Venkat put his head in his hands and whispered “Thank the gods.”
line: I broke two ribs during the MAV ascent. They were sore the whole time, but they realy started screaming when Vogel puled us in to
line: Once Johanssen gave us the al clear, Dr. Bossy-Beck made me wait while he first took off his suit, then took off mine. After he puled
line: Watney finished his two slices of pizza and a coke. He had another half-hour to kil before going back to Johnson Space Center.
line: “It's ok,” Watney shrugged.
line: Watney snorted in their direction. Then he closed his eyes and felt the sun on his face. It was a nice, boring afternoon.
